WELFARE WITHOUT TAXATION 
Autonomous production revenues for Universal Basic Income 
Eleanor ‘Nell’ Watson FCBS FIAP FRSA FRSS FLS CITP 
and Doreen Bianca
 
 
Keywords; Universal Basic Income, Autono-
mous production, Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
I. INTRODUCTION  
In the face of shifting means of produc-
tion from manual human labor to labor auto-
mation, one solution that stands out is the ad-
vancement of a Universal Basic Income, UBI to 
every citizen from the government with no 
strings attached. The proposal, however, has 
encountered sharp criticism from diﬀerent 
quarters questioning the morality behind sourc-
ing of funds, largely through taxation, to up-
hold an institution designed to provide social 
support. Others also perceive the idea as a 
form of socialism, or a capitalist road to com-
munism (1). The current discussion, however, 
seeks to demonstrate that the provision of such 
stipend can occur through the utilization of 
revenues realized from production driven by 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), and to a small ex-
tent, philanthropic contributions from the top 1 
percent of the population. 
 
II. BACKGROUND OF UBI DEBATES 
Disagreements regarding modern, more 
pragmatic means of handling welfare programs 
tend to focus on three pertinent issues. First, 
the existence of two opposing ideological per-
ceptions that on one side demand for improved 
welfare spending accompanied by higher taxes, 
while the other side is championing for de-
creased welfare spending, and subsequently 
lower taxes (2). Second, an economist-driven 
welfare reform process that is characteristically 
promising in theory, but which lacks proper de-
sign of the transition process that makes it po-
litically feasible (3). And ﬁnally, the fact that 
debates on welfare reforms remain typically 
narrow, hardly focusing on reforms capable of 
delivering comprehensive rules to govern, or 
better still, reconcile the welfare and tax sys-
tems (4).   
However, the pertinent question given 
the current technological advancement, is 
whether debates on welfare should continue fo-
cusing on the taxation aspect. In the wake of 
technological advancements that have seen ro-
bots powered by AI take up jobs that, during 
the industrial revolution and post-industrial 
revolution eras served a greater fraction of the 
populace, there is need for a means of tackling 
the ever-increasing income disparity within the 
populace. 
Within 
the 
context 
of 
this 
consequential disruption, it is increasingly be-
coming evident that individuals who cannot or 
are unable to mount successful competition 
against the advanced and talent-driven econo-
mies currently observed will require welfare as-
sistance in the form of Universal Basic Income, 
UBI. Contrary to traditional, and largely the 
prevailing belief that intervention through UBI 
is dependent on taxation, speciﬁcally skewed 
towards increased taxation that will aﬀect the 
very beneﬁciaries of UBI, the focus ought to 
shift to the revenues obtained from AI driven 
technologies. 
 
III. AUTONOMOUS PRODUCTION AND REVENUE 
GENERATION 
Leveraging technology for increased 
production capacity at minimal cost is the new 
norm. The blockchain technology, for instance, 
led to the emergence of smart transactions, de-
ﬁned by contracts that automatically process 
payment once the transaction is complete 
(5)(6). Taken further, embedding AI into such 
smart contracts has resulted in the emergence 
of Distributed Autonomous Organizations, 
DAOs. Such organizations have proven capable 
of running themselves, speciﬁcally by being 
able to conduct and complete trading activi-
ties, as well as hiring humans to perform cer-
tain tasks. The obvious impact here is that 
having successfully replaced humans in the 
working class labor and middle-class clerical 
capacities, right on its sight with the emergence 
of the iCEO are the middle-class management 
and the C-suite. The presence of these capabili-
ties means that the world is at a point where it 
is practically possible to create wealth volun-
tarily and within the principles of the free 
market. 
The resulting wealth, however, does 
have proprietors, who are either the owners of 
the business or the shareholders. In a capitalist 
economy, it would be impossible challenging an 
individual’s right to ownership of such colossal 
wealth. However, in the face of the existence of 
renowned philanthropists such as Bill and 
Melinda Gates Foundation, Warren Buﬀet, 
George Soros, Mark Zuckerberg, among others 
(7), the government can design a comprehen-
sive mechanism through which to channel such 
resources towards the fulﬁllment of UBI. Note-
worthy here is that such philanthropy tends to 
target causes and populations in developing 
and underdeveloped countries. UBI, on the 
contrary, will speciﬁcally target the nation’s 
citizens and will be practically impossible to 
apply beyond the borders of the nation. How-
ever, this does not imply the impossibility of 
continued support for the development of de-
veloping nations, either in terms of philan-
thropic disbursements or ﬁnancial and material 
aid from one nation-state government to an-
other as is currently the case. 
The sources of funds for UBI so far de-
scribed are on a purely voluntary basis. Rather 
surprisingly, the software technology realm 
currently boasts the existence of a Free and 
Open-Source 
Software 
(FOSS) 
movement 
whose objective is to enable individuals from 
across the world access, use, study, copy or 
even modify in any manner suitable to the 
user, a software, and shares the source code of 
the software rather openly to encourage the 
voluntary improvement of the software. While 
pointing at the beneﬁts of FOSS, which 
include, though not limited to decreased 
software costs, improved security, improved 
privacy since it gives users more control of 
their hardware, Soderberg argues that the 
movement rather “opens up the practice of 
intervening in computer technology to a non-
denumerable 
mass 
of 
people,” 
(8). 
The 
movement encourages user-centered production, 
which, from an analytical perspective, has bet-
ter chances of outperforming the conventional 
capitalist markets in the provision of social 
needs. The case of FOSS is much that of the 
capitalist market’s failure to satisfy human 
needs, which in turn motivates individuals to 
abandon the conventional market relations.  
A deeper examination of the character 
and 
nature 
of 
those 
involved 
in 
the 
contributions so far realized by FOSS shows 
that a greater fraction, if not the entire team, 
comprise 
of 
random 
nerds 
voluntarily 
producing things for free, in return for a small 
proportion of status within a conﬁned society, 
and whose desire is to make the world a better 
place with their ingenuity. Free and open 
source businesses running on AI and capable of 
trade, provisioning of microservices rather au-
tonomously will ride on a similar premise. Such 
businesses can produce real value for real peo-
ple. In addition, they will be capable of run-
ning charities for free. For instance, such mech-
anism would see the emergence of mutual in-
surance funds that run themselves. As such, 
any area currently characterized by low proﬁt 
margins and attracting hardly any interest 
from human-led organizations will be given a 
new lease of life. The resources and revenues so 
realized can go into taking care of UBI pay-
ments.  
Furthermore, DAOs will also be capable 
of producing dividends for real shareholders. 
All it would require is some form of capability 
and the FOSS mindset to bootstrap an open 
business within a short period, resulting in 
common people obtaining real improvements in 
their lifestyles. Interestingly, this mechanism 
requires no form of taxation or coercion, with 
any successful creation resulting in huge gains 
for the one behind the idea. While such ﬁrms 
already exist, such as Newman’s Own and co-
operatives, integrating the power of AI into 
such structures will enable the expansion of 
such ventures to levels currently unimaginable. 
Note that DAOs will not eliminate traditional 
companies in their entirety, which implies that 
there will be a mixed market scenario that 
prides both for-proﬁt and non-proﬁt ventures. 
That we are at the early days of auto-
mation of thinking is irrefutable. Having retired 
a greater fraction of bureaucratic and clerical 
duties that were the preserve of human beings, 
computer Algorithms will soon begin taking 
over the more creative tasks. Terrifying as it 
may be, we are in an era where Netﬂix has 
algorithms capable of commissioning which 
movies an individual should watch and a 
number of news outlets have algorithms used to 
generate content on crime, games, and other 
natural events, which points to the invasion of 
the most rote tasks in journalism (9). Composi-
tion and production of ﬁne art can also occur 
using computer algorithms. Given the men-
tioned trajectory of technological advancement, 
sooner it will be of no use nurturing human 
creativity. Yet, demand for social services will 
remain, and advancing UBI to citizens from the 
proceeds of these autonomous processes would 
be the sole available option. Such revenues will 
not come from tax, nor will they come from 
philanthropic contributions, they will be the 
result of AI-driven production. 
A study conducted by the Roosevelt In-
stitute on the feasibility of UBI indicates that 
advancing a given amount of stipend to mem-
bers of the society by growing the federal debt, 
i.e., without raising taxes, would result in a 
substantial growth of the economy. According 
to its ﬁnding, advancing, say $12000 per year 
per adult would result in a permanent econom-
ic growth equivalent to between 12.56 and 
13.10 percent, or about 2.5 trillion dollars by 
2025 (10). In addition, such a policy would re-
sult in a 2 percent increase in the number of 
Americans with jobs (10). Given the undesira-
bility of federal debt expansion by a good 
number of contemporary economists, the cur-
rent study aims to show that the results would 
be rosier if such UBI funding does not come 
from debt expansion, but rather from actual 
revenue realized from AI-driven autonomous 
production.   
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In recent years, discussion of the poten-
tial implementation of UBI has pervaded every 
aspect of social and economic policies, especial-
ly given that many stakeholders felt that it 
would be foolish for any struggling government 
infrastructure to assume such colossal responsi-
bility. Often, the impediments have been large-
ly the sources of funds since majority analysts 
have always cast their eyes on taxation, and to 
some extent, government borrowing. However, 
with the emergence of a new model of wealth 
creation, namely through autonomous produc-
tion mechanism driven by DAOs and AI, the 
long pervading conundrum is no more. Techno-
logical developments continue to render many 
people jobless by eliminating direct human in-
tervention in diﬀerent ﬁelds of human interest. 
Given that production and wealth creation 
continues to take place, it becomes logical that 
governments should draw comprehensive plans 
to initiate and sustain UBI for the citizens 
funded by revenues from autonomous produc-
tion, thus completely eliminating the need for 
increased taxation to support welfare. 
REFERENCES 
1. R. van der Veen and P. van Parijs. A 
capitalist road to communism. Basic In-
come Studies. 2006. 
2. M. B. Sawicky. The end of welfare? : 
Consequences of federal devolution for 
the nation. Routledge. New York. 2016. 
3. J. E. Stiglitz, A. S. Edlin, and J. B. De 
Long. The economist’s voice: top econo-
mists take on today’s problems. Colum-
bia University Press. New York. 2012.  
4.  B. Palier. A long goodbye to Bismarck? 
: The politics of welfare reforms in con-
tinental Europe. Amsterdam University 
Press. Amsterdam. 2010. 
5.  M. Swan. Blockchain: blueprint for a 
new economy. O’Reilly. California. 2015. 
6. J. Reed. Smart contracts: The essential 
guide to using blockchain smart con-
tracts for cryptocurrency exchange. Cre-
ateSpace Independent Publishing Plat-
form.  
7. R. Lane. December 2013. The 50 philan-
thropists who have given away the most 
money. 
Forbes. 
Online. 
Available: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/randalllan
e/2013/11/18/the-50-philanthropists-
who-have-given-away-the-most-
money/#48821a2e1f5a 
8.   J. Soderberg. Hacking capitalism: The 
free and open source software movement. 
Routledge, New York. 2015. 
9. F, Foer. Facebook’s war on free will. 
The 
Guardian. 
Online. 
Available: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technolog
y/2017/sep/19/facebooks-war-on-free-
will 
10. M. Nikiforos, M. Steinbaum, and G. 
Zezza. Modelling the macroeconomic 
eﬀects of a Universal Basic Income. Roo-
sevelt 
Institute. 
Online. 
Available: 
http://rooseveltinstitute.org/modeling-
macroeconomic-eﬀects-ubi/ 
 
 
 
 
 
