The Quest for Dual and Binary Supermassive Black Holes: A Multi-Messenger View
Alessandra De Rosaa, Cristian Vignalib,c, Tamara Bogdanovićd, Pedro R. Capeloe, Maria Charisif, Massimo Dottig,h,
Bernd Husemanni, Elisabeta Lussoj,k,l, Lucio Mayere, Zsolt Paragim, Jessie Runnoen,o, Alberto Sesanag,p, Lisa
Steinbornq, Stefano Bianchir, Monica Colpig, Luciano Del Valles, Sándor Freyt, Krisztina É. Gabányit,u,v, Margherita
Giustiniw, Matteo Guainazzix, Zoltan Haimany, Noelia Herrera Ruizz, Rubén Herrero-Illanaaa,ab, Kazushi Iwasawaac,
S. Komossaad, Davide Lenaae,af, Nora Loiseauag, Miguel Perez-Torresah, Enrico Piconcelliai, Marta Volonteris
aINAF/IAPS - Istituto di Astroﬁsica e Planetologia Spaziali, Via del Fosso del Cavaliere I-00133, Roma, Italy
bDipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Alma Mater Studiorum, Università degli Studi di Bologna, Via Gobetti 93/2, 40129 Bologna, Italy
cINAF – Osservatorio di Astroﬁsica e Scienza dello Spazio di Bologna, Via Gobetti 93/3, I-40129 Bologna, Italy
dCenter for Relativistic Astrophysics, School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, 837 State Street, Atlanta, GA 30332-0430
eCenter for Theoretical Astrophysics and Cosmology, Institute for Computational Science, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
fTAPIR, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
gUniversità degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, 20126 Milano, Italy
hINFN, Sezione di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 3, 20126 Milano, Italy
iMax-Planck-Institut für Astronomie, Königstuhl 17, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
jCentre for Extragalactic Astronomy, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
kDipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universitá degli Studi di Firenze, Via. G. Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy
lINAF - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi 5, 50125 Firenze, Italy
mJoint Institute for VLBI ERIC, Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD, Dwingeloo, The Netherlands
nDepartment of Astronomy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
oDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA
pSchool of Physics and Astronomy and Institute of Gravitational Wave Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham
B15 2TT, United Kingdom
qUniversitäts-Sternwarte München, Scheinerstr.1, D-81679 München, Germany
rDipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università degli Studi Roma Tre, via della Vasca Navale 84, 00146 Roma, Italy
sSorbonne Universites et CNRS, UMR 7095, Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, 98 bis bd Arago, F-75014 Paris, France)
tKonkoly Observatory, Research Centre for Astronomy and Earth Sciences, Konkoly Thege M. út 15-17, H-1121 Budapest, Hungary
uMTA-ELTE Extragalactic Astrophysics Research Group, ELTE TTK Pázmány Péter sétány 1/A, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary
vDepartment of Astronomy, Eötvös Loránd University, Pázmány Péter sétány 1/A, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary
wCentro de Astrobiología (CSIC-INTA), Departamento de Astrofísica; Camino Bajo del Castillo s/n, Villanueva de la Cañada, E-28692
Madrid, Spain
xESA - European Space Agency. ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1 2201AZ Noordwijk, The Netherlands
yDepartment of Astronomy, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
zAstronomisches Institut, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany
aaEuropean Southern Observatory, Alonso de Córdova 3107, Vitacura, Casilla 19001, Santiago de Chile, Chile
abInstitute of Space Sciences (ICE, CSIC), Campus UAB, Carrer de Magrans, E-08193 Barcelona, Spain
acICREA & Institut de Ciències del Cosmos (ICCUB), Universitat de Barcelona (IEEC-UB), Barcelona 08028, Spain
adNational Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China
aeSRON, Netherlands Institute for Space Research, Sorbonnelaan 2, 3584 CA, Utrecht, The Netherlands
afDepartment of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Radboud University, P.O. Box 9010, 6500 GL, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
agXMM-Newton SOC, ESAC/ESA, E-28692 Villanueva de la Cañada, Madrid, Spain
ahInstituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía (IAA-CSIC), E-18008, Granada, Spain
aiINAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, via Frascati 33, 00040 Monte Porzio Catone (Roma), Italy
Abstract
The quest for binary and dual supermassive black holes (SMBHs) at the dawn of the multi-messenger era is compelling.
Detecting dual active galactic nuclei (AGN) – active SMBHs at projected separations larger than several parsecs – and
binary AGN – probing the scale where SMBHs are bound in a Keplerian binary – is an observational challenge. The study
of AGN pairs (either dual or binary) also represents an overarching theoretical problem in cosmology and astrophysics.
The AGN triggering calls for detailed knowledge of the hydrodynamical conditions of gas in the imminent surroundings
of the SMBHs and, at the same time, their duality calls for detailed knowledge on how galaxies assemble through major
and minor mergers and grow fed by matter along the ﬁlaments of the cosmic web. This review describes the techniques
used across the electromagnetic spectrum to detect dual and binary AGN candidates and proposes new avenues for
their search. The current observational status is compared with the state-of-the-art numerical simulations and models
for formation of dual and binary AGN. Binary SMBHs are among the loudest sources of gravitational waves (GWs) in
the Universe. The search for a background of GWs at nHz frequencies from inspiralling SMBHs at low redshifts, and
the direct detection of signals from their coalescence by the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna in the next decade,
make this a theme of major interest for multi-messenger astrophysics. This review discusses the future facilities and
observational strategies that are likely to signiﬁcantly advance this fascinating ﬁeld.
Keywords:
Galaxies: active, Galaxies: interactions, Galaxies: nuclei, quasars: supermassive black holes, gravitational
waves
Preprint submitted to New Astronomy Reviews
January 20, 2020
arXiv:2001.06293v1  [astro-ph.GA]  17 Jan 2020
Contents
I
AGN pairs and multiplets with kpc-to-pc scale spatial separations
5
1
Observations of dual AGN
6
1.1
Optical surveys of dual AGN at sub-kpc/kpc separation: the search for candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.1.1
Optical spectroscopy of unresolved dual AGN candidates: double-peaked narrow-line emitters . . .
7
1.1.2
From candidates to detection: follow-up studies for the closest, sub-kpc pairs, and the power of
integral-ﬁeld spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
X-ray observations of dual AGN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.1
Discovery and follow-up observations of dual AGN and candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.2
Searching for dual AGN in X-ray survey ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3
C-GOALS: X-ray follow-up of IR-bright galaxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.4
High-z X-ray observations of multiple AGN systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3
AGN dual detection in near- and mid-infrared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.4
Dual AGN in the radio waveband . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Theory on dual AGN systems: cosmological and isolated simulations of mergers
16
2.1
Cosmological Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.1
Fraction of AGN pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.2
Conditions for the formation of dual AGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Isolated Mergers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.1
Link between merger dynamics and AGN fuelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Dual AGN properties and occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Stalling BH pairs as tight dual AGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
From kpc- to pc-scale separations: SMBH pairs in circumnuclear disks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
II
Gravitationally bound SMBH binaries with sub-parsec separations
29
3
Theoretical background
29
3.1
Interactions with stars and other SMBHs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Interactions with gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Open questions related to theory of SMBHBs with sub-parsec separations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Observational evidence for SMBH binaries with sub-parsec separations.
32
4.1
Radio imaging searches for SMBHBs with the VLBI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Spectroscopic searches for SMBHBs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
Broad emission-line velocity shifts as signatures of sub-pc SMBHBs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.2
Peculiar broad emission-line ratios as signatures of sub-pc SMBHBs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Photometric searches for sub-pc SMBHBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
III
Future perspectives
39
5
Search for dual and multiple AGN in the era of surveys
40
5.1
Radio surveys in the cm waveband . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
X-ray surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Optical spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Mid-IR imaging and spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
The quest for hard SMBH binaries
44
6.1
AGN variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Theory and Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2
7
GW horizons
46
7.1
LISA: probing the SMBH assembly from their infancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
PTAs: giants in the low-redshift Universe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
IV
Concluding remarks
50
8
Acknowledgments
51
3
Introduction
Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) with mass of ∼106–
109 M⊙are ubiquitous in ellipticals, in the bulges of disk
galaxies and in at least a fraction of dwarf galaxies. The
tight correlation between the black hole mass and the bulge
stellar velocity dispersion (Ferrarese and Merritt, 2000;
Gebhardt et al., 2000; Kormendy and Ho, 2013) suggests
that SMBHs are likely to aﬀect the evolution of the host
galaxy over cosmological time-scales. In contemporary as-
trophysics, a large variety of physical phenomena concur to
establish the close connection between the formation and
evolution of galaxies and of their central SMBHs (Silk and
Rees, 1998; Di Matteo et al., 2005). Galaxy mergers may
be a way through which SMBHs form by direct collapse of
gas at the center of protogalaxies (Begelman et al., 2006;
Mayer et al., 2010; Mayer and Bonoli, 2019). Furthermore,
there is growing evidence that major mergers trigger the
most luminous AGN (e.g., Treister et al. 2012; Fan et al.
2016; Goulding et al. 2018), although this result is still de-
bated. Numerical simulations show that galaxy collisions
are conducive to episodes of major gas inﬂows that feed the
central SMBH, thus powering accretion and nuclear activ-
ity (e.g., Di Matteo et al. 2005). Models of structure for-
mation can reproduce the observed large-scale properties
of quasars (e.g., their environment and clustering cluster-
ing) if their bright and short-lived active phases are most
likely triggered by mergers (see Kauﬀmann and Haehnelt
2000; Alexander and Hickox 2012 and references therein).
However, not all nuclear activity is triggered by galaxy
collisions as SMBH growth can occur also through secular
processes (Martin et al., 2018; Ricarte et al., 2019) with
mergers triggering an initial rapid growth phase (McAlpine
et al., 2018). In the last decade, quasar pairs at sub-Mpc
(projected) separations have raised interest as these sys-
tems could possibly trace regions of systematic large-scale
overdensities of galaxies (e.g., Hennawi et al. 2006, 2010;
Sandrinelli et al. 2014; Eftekharzadeh et al. 2017; San-
drinelli et al. 2018b; Lusso et al. 2018).
The connection between AGN triggering and galaxy
mergers is not clear yet.
To discuss this connection, in
this paper we deﬁne dual AGN those interacting galaxy
systems containing two active nuclei powered by accretion
onto SMBHs that are nested inside their host but that are
not mutually gravitationally bound. If only one SMBH in
active, we refer to this system as oﬀset AGN. Similarly,
binary AGN at sub-pc separations are deﬁned as active
SMBHs which are gravitationally bound, forming a Kep-
lerian binary.1 The (projected) separation ranges between
∼1 pc and ∼100 kpc in dual AGN, while it lies in the
pc–sub-pc range in binary systems (pc-scale binaries could
fall into either category depending on the parameters of
the system).
1Hereafter, the separations between observed AGN and galaxy
pairs are meant as projected if not stated otherwise.
A number of studies in diﬀerent wavebands show evi-
dence for a higher fraction of dual AGN in galaxies with a
close companion, suggesting that galaxy interactions play
a role in the AGN triggering process (e.g. Ellison et al.,
2011; Koss et al., 2012; Silverman et al., 2011; Satya-
pal et al., 2014; Kocevski et al., 2015; Koss et al., 2018).
However, there are investigations revealing no enhanced
AGN activity in mergers compared to a matched control
sample of inactive galaxies (e.g. Cisternas et al., 2011;
Mechtley et al., 2016). These conﬂicting results may be
a consequence of diﬀerent sample selection criteria (such
as merger stage of interacting galaxies and/or AGN lumi-
nosity) and observational biases (e.g., nuclear obscuration
and AGN variability). In light of these uncertainties, the
detection and characterisation of dual and binary SMBHs
is fundamental if we want to understand the formation and
accretion history of SMBHs across cosmic ages.
A further issue which makes the study of dual and bi-
nary AGN one of the forefront topics in modern astro-
physics is that these systems are the natural precursors
of coalescing binary SMBHs, which are strong emitters of
low-frequency gravitational waves (GWs). Detecting the
GW signal from the inspiral, merger and ringdown of bi-
nary black holes with LISA, the ESA’s Laser Interferom-
eter Space Antenna (Amaro-Seoane et al., 2017), will let
us unveil the rich population of SMBHs of ∼104−7 M⊙
forming in the collision of galaxy halos, out to redshifts
as large as z ∼20 (Colpi et al., 2019). Note that LISA
will detect the “light” SMBHs at the low-mass end of their
mass distribution.
Thus, LISA will unveil the origin of
the ﬁrst quasars, carrying exquisite measurements of the
black hole masses and spins, and providing the ﬁrst census
of this yet unexplored population of sources. Soon, Pulsar
Timing Array (PTA) experiments at nHz frequencies will
detect the cosmic GW background radiation from inspi-
raling SMBH binaries (SMBHBs) of ∼109 M⊙at z ∼1
(Kelley et al., 2019a). Discovering binary massive black
holes over such a wide range of masses will shed light on
the deep link between SMBHs and galaxies, their growth,
evolution and assembly.
This review, far from being exhaustive on the topic
of multiple AGN systems,
surveys the main results
that
emerged
during
a
workshop
organized
at
the
Lorentz
Center
in
Leiden
“The
Quest
for
Multiple
Supermassive Black Holes:
A Multi-Messenger View”
(https://www.lorentzcenter.nl).
The Workshop was
dedicated to multi-messenger studies of multiple SMBHs,
with emphasis on the best strategies for their detections
with current and upcoming observatories, and to the most
updated and comprehensive numerical simulations and
theories on the pairing and merging of SMBHs. As such,
this review may guide the community to answer to the
most compelling questions posed during the meeting:
1) Can state-of-the art simulations of interacting galaxies
provide key indicators that will let us discover dual, ob-
scured AGN systems?
2) How can we unveil the missing population of 10–100 pc
4
dual black holes?
3) Which observational strategies should we envisage in
order to demonstrate the existence of the binary SMBHs
at separations close to and below a milli-parsec?
4) Is there a population of transient AGN that may
be candidate counterparts of inspiralling or/and merging
SMBHs, and how can this population be unambiguously
identiﬁed?
The review is organized in two main bodies describing
the systems depending on their separation: Sect. I is fo-
cused on AGN and multiplets with kpc-to-pc scale separa-
tion, while Sect. II on gravitationally bound SMBHs with
sub-pc separations. Within each section we describe the
datasets already available, the observational results and
the predictions resulting from models and state-of-the art
numerical simulations. We then discuss the most eﬀective
ways to deﬁne, observe, analyse and interpret the wealth
of data collected in diﬀerent wavebands.
Finally, in Sect. III, we present ﬁrst the techniques and
strategy developments in this ﬁeld, describing the future
electromagnetic observing facilities and numerical set-up.
Then, we explore the low-frequency GW Universe, the
new window which will provide a complementary view of
SMBHs by detecting the GW signal from those black holes
coalescing in binaries. Measuring the BH masses and spins
across cosmic ages will let us uncover their nature, growth
and yet unknown origin.
For the calculations presented in this review, a concor-
dance cosmology with H0 = 70 km s−1 Mpc−1, ΩM = 0.3
and ΩΛ = 0.7 (Wright, 2006) has been adopted, and mag-
nitudes are in the AB system; when literature results are
reported, we refer to the original papers for the corre-
spondingly adopted cosmology.
Part I
AGN pairs and multiplets
with kpc-to-pc scale
spatial separations
The triggering of AGN activity in galaxy mergers has been
extensively studied both from an observational and a theo-
retical point of view. The varied observational and numer-
ical techniques adopted thus far are highly complementary,
since diﬀerent bands and/or numerical setups and recipes
have inherently distinct limitations.
Diﬀerent methods have been proposed to identify good
candidates of dual and binary AGN. Most of the AGN can-
didates and pairs with pc-to-kpc separations have been
identiﬁed either through extensive optical, radio, mid-
infrared and hard X-ray surveys, and through pointed
observations mainly in the high-energy domain; all these
technique will be discussed in the following sections. Nev-
ertheless, dual AGN systems are rare, and most of their
detection has been serendipitous.
A challenge in this kind of studies is the need for a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant sample of dual and multiple AGN cov-
ering a wide dynamical range in spatial separations, from
pc- to kpc-scale separation. While a number of AGN pair
candidates and merging galaxies have been discovered over
the past several years, only a handful of these have even-
tually been conﬁrmed, usually through intense and obser-
vationally costly multiband follow-ups. An example is the
increasing availability of SDSS optical spectral data where
dual AGN are identiﬁed through doubled-peaked O[III]
line, but only about 2 per cent of these candidates are ﬁ-
nally conﬁrmed with multi-wavelength follow-up. This is
due to the fact that this signature (i.e., the presence of
a doubled-peaked proﬁle) is not unique, indicating other
possible eﬀects originated nearby a single AGN (e.g., mat-
ter outﬂows).
Similar arguments can be applied to observations at
other frequencies: if not sensitive enough, it might be chal-
lenging to distinguish AGN from star formation processes
in radio-emitting regions using only radio data; besides,
only about 10 per cent of AGN are radio emitting. Fur-
thermore, the detection of X-ray emission associated with
a source is not per se an indication of the presence of an
active nucleus, since also star-forming galaxies and weakly
accreting black holes (e.g., LINERs, low-ionization nuclear
emission-line regions, and AGN with ineﬃcient disks) can
produce some level of X-ray emission. Finally, mid-IR all-
sky surveys can detect a number of obscured systems and
then complement the optical search of AGN. Overall, the
best observing strategy requires the search for good can-
didates to be then conﬁrmed through appropriate follow-
up programs, and each wavelength is pursuing its own
quest in this direction, contributing to the ﬁnal detec-
tion/conﬁrmation.
On the numerical side, there are two main avenues of re-
search: cosmological and isolated simulations of mergers.
Galaxy mergers and systems of multiple AGN can be pro-
duced through cosmological simulations.
This research
provides important counterpart to observations, allowing
the measure of the dual AGN fraction with respect to sin-
gle AGN. A variety of hydrodynamic cosmological simula-
tions exists; however, only a few are able to produce AGN
pairs with separations down to kpc scales, since combin-
ing large volumes with relatively high resolution is com-
putationally very expensive. On the other hand, idealized
merger simulations are able to resolve sub-kpc scales, that
is fundamental to follow the dynamics of SMBHs. Nev-
ertheless, simulations of isolated galaxy mergers cannot
provide any prediction on the fraction of AGN pairs out of
the total number of AGN, although it is possible to com-
pute an “activity-dual time” normalized to the time when
at least one BH is active.
In this chapter, we review the current observational con-
straints on the existence of merger-triggered single and
dual AGN (i.e.
AGN pairs that are not gravitationally
5
bound) observed at diﬀerent wavelengths (Sect. 1).
In
each section we will describe the best strategy adopted in
a given band to select good candidates and follow-up ob-
servations to conﬁrm or disprove them. We will also show
that a multi-wavelength approach is the only viable way to
improve the detection rate of dual AGN systems. We then
summarize our most up-to-date theoretical understanding
of this process (Sect. 2) describing mergers in larger but
coarser cosmological simulations and mergers between ide-
alised, isolated galaxies from higher-resolution simulations.
We also review the physical processes that may produce
SMBH pairs stalling at 1–100 pc spatial separations, pos-
sibly detectable as tight dual AGN. The predictions from
both these sets of simulations, such as the dual AGN frac-
tion, nuclear environment (e.g., gas reservoir) and system
properties (e.g., BH mass ratio, separation) will then be
compared with the available and planned observations.
1. Observations of dual AGN
The detection of spatially-resolved dual AGN at pro-
jected separation of a few tens of kpcs, in optical and mid-
infrared surveys, mostly from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS, York et al. 2000; Abazajian et al. 2009), the Bary-
onic Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS, Ahn et al.
2012), and the Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE,
Wright et al. 2010), reinforces the idea that gas-rich merg-
ers may trigger the active nuclear phase in both galaxies
(e.g., Myers et al. 2008; Foreman et al. 2009; Satyapal
et al. 2014, 2017; Weston et al. 2017). Bright AGN pairs
with separations less than a few hundreds of kpc observed
at similar redshifts are ideal probes of both the small-
scale ( <∼100 kpc) structure of the intergalactic medium
(e.g., Rorai et al. 2017) and the large-scale (order of Mpc)
rich environment where mergers are more likely to happen
(e.g., Djorgovski et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2011; Farina et al.
2013; Deane et al. 2014; Hennawi et al. 2015; Lusso et al.
2018).
One method of detecting/observing dual AGN con-
sists of time-expensive follow-up observations of previously
identiﬁed candidates, selected through wide-ﬁeld surveys
or large catalogues. Another method relies on using the
data from survey ﬁelds (e.g., SDSS in optical, GOALS
in mid-IR, COSMOS and Chandra Deep Field-North and
South in X-rays) to select dual AGN candidates and de-
ﬁne also their properties. These two approaches are highly
complementary, as discussed in the following. We present
in this section the photometric and spectroscopic surveys
and integral-ﬁeld spectroscopy outcomes and their success
in identifying the closest candidates for dual and multi-
ple AGN. These candidates should then be conﬁrmed by
pointed follow-up observations. We also show the inves-
tigations carried out through optical, X-ray, mid-infrared,
and radio techniques used to detect and characterize spa-
tially resolved and unresolved dual AGN systems with kpc-
to pc-scale separation.
1.1. Optical surveys of dual AGN at sub-kpc/kpc separa-
tion: the search for candidates
In the optical, the photometric and spectroscopic SDSS
and BOSS surveys are vast databases that have been ex-
plored to search for pair candidates (e.g., Hennawi et al.
2006, 2010; Myers et al. 2008; Shen and Loeb 2010; San-
drinelli et al. 2014, 2018b; Lusso et al. 2018; Lena et al.
2018). Yet, one of the main limitations of such surveys in
the search for pair candidates is mostly due to the ﬁber
collision limit: ﬁbers cannot be placed closer than 55′′
for SDSS and 62′′ for BOSS. For a target located at z =
0.008−0.7 (or a luminosity distance DL ≈35−4300 Mpc),
the SDSS ﬁber encompasses between 0.5 and 21 kpc (given
the ﬁber size of 3′′ and a 2′′ in SDSS and BOSS, respec-
tively). For the galaxies which do not fall within a single
ﬁber, this limit implies a minimum physical distance be-
tween pairs of about 500 kpc at z ≃2. One way to over-
come the ﬁber collision limit is through overlapping plates
(e.g., Blanton et al. 2003). However, only ∼30 per cent
and ∼40 per cent of the sky observed by SDSS and BOSS,
respectively, is covered by such overlap.
Another possibility to select suitable close pair candi-
dates, also at higher redshifts, is to mine the photometric
quasar catalogues such as the XDQSO (Bovy et al. 2011,
2012; DiPompeo et al. 2015), which can then be followed
up spectroscopically (e.g., see Hennawi et al. 2006; My-
ers et al. 2008; Hennawi et al. 2010; Eftekharzadeh et al.
2017 for details). To build the XDQSO catalogue, Bovy
et al. (2011) segregate quasars from stars selected from the
photometric SDSS/BOSS catalogues of 106 sources with
r < 22 using machine learning algorithms.
This work
uncovered ∼300 quasar pairs with projected separations
R⊥< 1 Mpc. Only 60 of them have similar redshifts (with
redshift diﬀerences around 5,000–10,000 km/s at z ∼2).
The probability to ﬁnd a quasar pair against pairs of stars
is (QSO pairs)/(star pairs) ∼10−4, with a success rate of
pair conﬁrmation of ∼25 per cent. We refer to Findlay
et al. (2018) for the most updated release of pair candi-
dates at large separation with spectroscopic follow-up and
for further statistical details on the chance probability of
ﬁnding a quasar pair over the single quasar population
(see also, e.g., Kayo and Oguri 2012; Eftekharzadeh et al.
2019). One should note, however, that these rare quasar
pairs at kpc-scale projected separation are biased towards
being very blue (i.e., SDSS selected). Thus these surveys
miss interacting, much closer dust-obscured nuclei hosted
in dual AGN.
In the following subsections, we will discuss spectropho-
tometric and spatial techniques to identify dual AGN can-
didates.
These observational methods are not mutually
exclusive but can be ideally used in combination to im-
prove the selection of dual AGN candidates and possibly
their further conﬁrmation.
6
1.1.1. Optical spectroscopy of unresolved dual AGN candi-
dates: double-peaked narrow-line emitters
Once two AGN become closer than the spatial resolu-
tion of the imaging data, it is nearly impossible to identify
them as independent sources. Depending on the redshift
of the source, for ground-based observatories this already
happens at kpc scales.
Spectroscopy can overcome this
limitation by detecting several kinematic components in
velocity space through emission lines produced by AGN
ionization, e.g., so-called double-peaked emitters.
This
technique is based on the assumption that each AGN in
a pair carries its own Narrow Line Region (NLR) – the
clouds at a scale of ∼1 kpc from the AGN core, which
trace the systemic velocity of the AGN as they move in
their common gravitational potential. The identiﬁcation
of double-peaked emitters is only limited by the spectral
resolution of the spectrograph with respect to the width
and ﬂux ratio of the emission lines. The same technique
has been applied to the BLR as observational evidence of
sub-pc SMBHBs systems; this is extensively discussed in
Sect. 4.2.2.
SDSS has provided the largest database of extra-galactic
spectra and has been commonly used for the identiﬁca-
tion of double-peaked narrow-line emitters.
In particu-
lar, the [OIII] λλ4960, 5007 emission lines have been in-
vestigated for signatures of double peaks, since these are
expected to be the brightest rest-frame optical emission
lines in case of AGN photoionization (Rosario et al., 2010).
Other high-ionization lines, such as [NeV] λ3426 or [NeIII]
λ3869, can be be used in a similar way in the higher-
redshift sources. High-ionization double-peaked emission
lines have been identiﬁed serendipitously in individual
sources (Gerke et al., 2007; Xu and Komossa, 2009; Bar-
rows et al., 2012; Benítez et al., 2013) or through system-
atic studies of large spectroscopic databases such as SDSS
(Wang et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010b;
Pilyugin et al., 2012; Ge et al., 2012; Barrows et al., 2013;
Lyu and Liu, 2016), LAMOST (Shi et al., 2014) or DEEP2
and AGES (Comerford et al., 2013).
Those systematic
studies revealed that roughly one per cent of the AGN
population exhibit double peaks in the forbidden high-
ionization lines. However, not all double-peaked emitters
are really dual AGN, due to the complex internal kinemat-
ics of the NLR in luminous AGN. AGN-driven outﬂows
(e.g., King and Pounds 2015), compact rotating gas disks
(e.g., Villforth and Hamann 2015) or illumination of inter-
acting companion galaxies (e.g., Xu and Komossa 2009;
Sun et al. 2016) may lead to similar signatures in the line
proﬁles without having a dual AGN origin.2 Furthermore,
single-peaked AGN in SDSS may turn out to be intrinsi-
cally double-peaked AGN when higher spectral resolution
observations are employed (e.g. Woo et al., 2014). Hence,
neither the parent sample of double-peaked narrow-line
2A further potential challenge in ground-based spectroscopic
searches is the seeing, which may project the emission-lines of a single
AGN onto its companion galaxy, thus mimicking an active pair.
emitters based on SDSS is complete nor does their number
count directly relate to the dual AGN fractions, without
further observations.
1.1.2. From candidates to detection: follow-up studies for
the closest, sub-kpc pairs, and the power of integral-
ﬁeld spectroscopy
As speciﬁed above, a wide range of phenomena might
concur in producing the shape of the continuum and the
proﬁle of the spectral lines. The underlying stellar popula-
tion is distributed in a combination of morpho-kinematical
features such as bulges, disks, bars, and tidal streams; neu-
tral and ionised gas experiences a combination of virial
(e.g., rotation in the plane of the galaxy) and non-virial
kinematics (i.e.
inﬂows and outﬂows powered by AGN
and/or star formation activity).
As a result, it is clear
that the detection of double-peaked [OIII] emission lines
remains, in the great majority of cases, the starting point
for a deeper investigation.
Probing the activity level of galactic nuclei is nontrivial,
especially in the case of obscured AGN pairs, and the task
requires the examination of multi-wavelength evidence, of-
ten from both the spectroscopic and imaging side (e.g. Ko-
mossa et al., 2003; Mazzarella et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2013;
Gabányi et al., 2016; Lena et al., 2018).
Within the optical-to-IR realm, a valuable tool in the in-
vestigation of galaxies is integral-ﬁeld spectroscopy (IFS),
a technique providing, simultaneously, imaging and spa-
tially resolved spectroscopy (e.g., Lena 2015). With a sin-
gle observation one can obtain a two-dimensional view of
the gaseous and stellar kinematics, of the emission-line ﬂux
distributions, and of the emission line ratios, a diagnostic
for the dominant ionisation mechanism (AGN, star for-
mation, shocks) at play at diﬀerent locations within the
galaxy (Baldwin et al., 1981). Indeed, IFS has been used
by a number of authors to follow-up dual AGN candidates
(e.g. McGurk et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2012; McGurk et al.,
2015), to gain further insights on conﬁrmed dual AGN (e.g.
Kosec et al., 2017), and to produce serendipitous discov-
eries (e.g. Husemann et al., 2018). Thanks to the recent
availability of IFS surveys, such as SDSS MaNGA (Bundy
et al., 2015), IFS data have also been used as a starting
point for the identiﬁcation of new dual candidates (Ellison
et al., 2017). They represent a particularly promising av-
enue for discovery and characterization of closer, sub-kpc
separation AGN pairs.
The work presented by Fu et al. (2012) is illustrative:
the authors performed high-resolution imaging plus optical
and NIR IFS for a sample of approximately 100 double-
peaked AGN selected from SDSS-DR7 (Abazajian et al.,
2009). Imaging was performed to achieve a spatial reso-
lution of approximately 0.1′′; towards this goal they used
archival Hubble Space Telescope images, H-band and K′-
band images obtained with OSIRIS (Larkin et al., 2006)
and NIRC2 on the Keck telescope (see also Rosario et al.
2011; Fu et al. 2011; McGurk et al. 2011; McGurk et al.
2015; Liu et al. 2018b for similar experiments).
NIR
7
Figure 1: Top: candidate dual AGN where the double-peaked emission lines are due to the relative orbital motion of two galaxies. Bottom:
single AGN with extended narrow-line region producing a double-peaked emission-line proﬁle. From left to right: SDSS [OIII]λ5007 emission
line proﬁle with the two-component ﬁt overplotted, high-resolution broad-band image, emission-line–free continuum from the IFS data,
emission-line intensity map, velocity map, and velocity dispersion map. SDSS object designations are labeled in the ﬁrst column. The ﬁlter
for the broad-band images are labeled, and the scale bar indicates a transverse separation of 5 kpc. Blue and red contours on the high-
resolution image of the single AGN indicate the kinematically-resolved blue-shifted and red-shifted components. Contours in the third and
fourth column are from the broad-band images in the second column, which have been spatially aligned with the datacubes. The measured
emission line is labeled in the fourth column. N is up and E is to the left; major tickmarks are spaced in 1′′. Adapted from ﬁgure 1 and ﬁgure
4 of Fu et al. (2012).
IFS data assisted by adaptive optics were obtained with
the OSIRIS integral ﬁeld unit (Larkin et al., 2006; Wiz-
inowich et al., 2006); for the majority of the targets, seeing-
limited IFS in the optical and NIR was obtained with the
2.2m Hawaii Telescope instrument SNIFS (Aldering et al.,
2002; Lantz et al., 2004) at a spatial resolution of approx-
imately 1.2′′. The combination of high-resolution imaging
and spatially-resolved spectroscopy allowed the authors to
distinguish between candidates where the double-peaked
emission-lines arise from the relative orbital motion of two
galaxies (possibly both active), and single AGN mimicking
the spectral signatures of potential dual AGN, for exam-
ple because of emission from an extended narrow-emission
line regions (both examples are shown in Fig. 1). They
showed that, for 98 per cent of their targets, the double-
peaked emission lines could be explained as the result of
gas kinematics within a single AGN, with only 2 per cent of
the double-peaked proﬁles being produced by the relative
velocity of merging systems. Still, a conclusive result on
the nature of the four dual AGN candidates selected with
this investigation could not be achieved, as the scenario of
a single AGN illuminating gas in two merging galaxies re-
mained a viable option. As it is often the case, high-spatial
resolution X-ray or radio observations were invoked to dis-
sipate the residual ambiguities (see Sect. 1.2 and future
perspectives in Sect. 5.2).
To summarise, IFS is a powerful technique which allows
a clear view of the kinematics and ionisation mechanisms
at play within a galaxy. It brings with it the strengths
inherent to the optical and NIR wavelength range (that is
medium/high spatial and spectral resolution); however, it
Figure 2: Chandra image of NGC 6240 and its pair of accreting
SMBHs.
In this colour-coded image, red represents soft X-rays,
and blue hard X-rays. [Image credit: NASA/CXC; Komossa et al.
(2003)].
also bears its limitations (mostly the eﬀects of dust obscu-
ration, and the fact that not every AGN displays optical
signatures). Moreover, the drastic reduction in the number
of candidates that this technique allows to achieve comes
at the cost of using a wealth of data which often are not
publicly available and that can be obtained only through
the access to highly competitive facilities.
1.2. X-ray observations of dual AGN
The high penetrative power of hard X-rays provides a
unique and often ultimate tool in the hunt for multiple
8
active nuclei in a galaxy, being less aﬀected by contami-
nation from stellar processes and absorption, though still
limited by spatial resolution. Indeed, it was X-ray imag-
ing spectroscopy which led to the identiﬁcation of the ﬁrst
pair of accreting SMBHs in the galaxy NGC 6240 (see the
next section). A large (above ∼1042 erg s−1) point-like
luminosity is more likely ascribed to an AGN that to a
starburst and/or emission from low-mass X-ray binaries
(see e.g., Fragos et al. 2013; Lehmer et al. 2016).
However, often both a nuclear and an extended com-
ponent can contribute to the X-ray spectrum of a dual
system, requiring a high spatial resolution and a low back-
ground to properly disentangle the contribution of a weak
AGN emission from a diﬀuse component. In the end, X-ray
observations represent an eﬃcient way to detect accretion-
powered processes in low-to-moderate obscured sources.
Although heavy obscuration prevents us from providing a
complete census of the AGN population, deep exposures,
coupled with hard X-ray coverage, may mitigate this issue.
The best angular resolution currently available in the X-
ray band is that of Chandra, of the order of one arcsec for
on-axis observations. This translates into ≈20 pc as the
minimal angular scale probed at z = 0.001, which becomes
≈1.8 kpc at z = 0.1 and ≈8 kpc at z = 1. From these num-
bers it appears clear that at present X-rays can reasonably
probe only dual AGN at kpc-scale separations, and this
will hold true until the launch of a mission with a Chan-
dra-like resolution but with the support of a much larger
eﬀective area (e.g., AXIS, a NASA probe-class mission,
and Lynx, a NASA large mission, currently under study,
see Sect. 5.2). Needless to say that many of the Chandra
observations suﬀer from low photon-counting statistics, en-
abling the detection/characterization of sources only in
nearby galaxies.
Despite this, Chandra provided X-ray
images of remarkable detail and quality for the ﬁrst time,
thanks to the very low intrinsic background and sharp
Point Spread Function (PSF). Limited photon statistics
for more distant sources can be overcome by increasing the
exposure time. Alternatively, XMM-Newton can overcome
the issue of photon statistics due to its much higher eﬀec-
tive area, but its on-axis PSF FWHM (≈6′′, i.e. about six
times larger than Chandra) limits the study of dual AGN
to even larger-separation systems than Chandra.
Besides using X-ray imaging spectroscopy for the discov-
ery of AGN pairs, one method of detecting/observing dual
AGN in X-rays consists of follow-up observations of previ-
ously identiﬁed multiple AGN systems (e.g., pre-selected in
optical band, see previous Sect. 1.1). This technique is pre-
sented in Sect. 1.2.1. Another method relies on using sur-
vey ﬁelds (e.g., COSMOS, the Chandra Deep Field North
and South), taking advantage of the plethora of multi-
wavelength data typically available in such ﬁelds, needed
to select dual AGN candidates and deﬁne their proper-
ties; this technique is further discussed in Sect. 1.2.2 and
Sect. 1.2.3. The advantage of the ﬁrst method is clearly
the possibility of targeting the system with a “proper” in-
strumental set-up, chosen to maximize the possibility of
detecting/separating the AGN on the one side and deﬁn-
ing their properties on the other side. If the search for
dual AGN is pursued using the second method - where
this investigation is essentially one of the multiple science
goals that an X-ray survey can fulﬁll - the entire ﬁeld of
view can be used to reveal dual AGN, although the de-
crease in sensitivity and the broadening of the PSF at
oﬀ-axis positions can limit their eﬀectiveness. The latter
approach can beneﬁt from the typically already available
spectroscopy in X-ray survey ﬁelds, which is of the order
of 54–65 per cent in e.g.
COSMOS-Legacy and CDF-S
(Marchesi et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2017). Candidate dual
AGN can be selected using photometric redshifts in all the
cases where multi-band accurate photometry, coupled with
proper galaxy (or galaxy+AGN) templates, is available.
This technique, although simple, can be used at zeroth
order also to identify large-scale structures to which dual
AGN may belong. Clearly, spectroscopic follow-up obser-
vations are needed to ﬁnally conﬁrm that the two AGN
have comparable redshifts, hence being a “certiﬁed” pair.
1.2.1. Discovery and follow-up observations of dual AGN
and candidates
The ﬁrst spatially resolved SMBH pair was identiﬁed in
X-rays, and was based on a dedicated Chandra observa-
tion which targeted the nearby ultraluminous IR galaxy
(ULIRG) NGC 6240. Chandra imaging spectroscopy has
revealed that both galaxy cores emit luminous point-like
X-rays (Fig. 2), and show similar X-ray spectra which are
ﬂat, heavily absorbed, both exhibiting a strong neutral
iron line (Komossa et al., 2003; Nardini, 2017). These are
the tell-tale signs of heavily obscured AGN. The nuclei
are at ∼1 kpc separation and are likely both Compton
thick (i.e., with absorption column density along the line
of sight NH
>∼1024 cm−2). Recently, Kollatschny et al.
(2019), using VLT/MUSE data at a resolution of 75 milli-
arcsec, have reported the discovery of a third nucleus in
this galaxy: the Southern component appears to host two
distinct nuclei, separated by 198 pc only. The lack of a
radio counterpart for the newly detected nucleus suggests
that it could be not active; furthermore, no 12CO(2-1)
emission at its position is detected by ALMA (Treister
et al., 2020), in stark contrast with the two previously
known nuclei.
In X-ray targeted observations, new dual AGN have
been discovered serendipitously.
The clearest cases are
those for which both double nuclei show emission up to
highest energies, above 10 keV: Mrk 739, a kpc-scale
separation (3.4 kpc) at high (≈0.7) Eddington ratio
(Koss et al., 2011), selected in the hard-X ray domain by
Swift/BAT and followed-up with the highest spatial reso-
lution available (Chandra); the ultra-luminous IR galaxy
Mrk 463 (3.8 kpc separation; see Bianchi et al. 2008),
for which NuSTAR broad-band analysis has recently con-
ﬁrmed the presence of Compton-thin obscuration in both
nuclei (Yamada et al., 2018); Mrk 273, in the C-GOALS
9
Figure 3: Left panel: Absorption properties of a samples of dual systems observed in X-rays but selected in diﬀerent ways (optical, IR, X-rays)
presented in De Rosa et al. (2018). The upper panel shows the values of the absorption column density averaged in 3 ranges of projected
galaxy separations: 0–20, 20–60 and 60–100 kpc, while the lower panel reports the fraction of AGN in dual/multiple systems with NH above
1022 cm−2 as a function of the projected separation. Blue lines represent the average value as obtained for the large sample investigated in De
Rosa et al. (2018) (61 sources) when 90 per cent errors on NH are taken into account. Magenta lines represent the Swift/BAT average values
and 1σ error as reported in Ricci et al. (2015) in the same bin of 2–10 keV luminosity. Right panel: Fraction of Compton-thick AGN versus
merger stage as investigated in Ricci et al. (2017). These authors analysed a sample of infrared-selected local luminous and ultraluminous
infrared galaxies in diﬀerent merger stages and followed them up in the X-ray band with NuSTAR (up to ∼40 keV). The empty blue diamonds
represent the values for the four merger stages separately, while the ﬁlled black diamonds are the values for early and late mergers. The
red continuous line represents the intrinsic fraction of Compton-thick AGN measured by Swift/BAT (Ricci et al., 2015) with associated 1σ
uncertainty.
IR-selected sample, at 1 kpc separation:
also in this
case both nuclei are heavily obscured, one likely in the
Compton-thick regime according to broad-band Chandra
and NuSTAR observations (Iwasawa et al., 2018).
In the search and detection of dual AGN at kpc-
scale separation with XMM-Newton we can mention
IRAS 20210+1121, hosting a pair of Type 2 AGN at 11 kpc
separation (Piconcelli et al., 2010), the early-stage merg-
ing system ESO 509-IG066 (d=10.5 kpc, Guainazzi et al.
2005) whose double nuclei are both mildly obscured and
with a possible variable absorption column density (Kosec
et al., 2017), and Arp 299, where the presence and full
characterization of two AGN in the companion galaxies
IC 694 and NGC 3690 (separation of 4.6 kpc) was possible
thanks to the combination of Chandra and XMM-Newton
data (Ballo et al., 2004).
As said, at
pc scale separa-
tion, X-ray observations have the limitation due to the
PSF. The presence of two active, heavily obscured nuclei
in the spiral galaxy NGC 3393 (at ∼150 pc separation;
Fabbiano et al., 2011), has been questioned by Koss et al.
(2015) using deeper Chandra data combined with adap-
tive optics near-IR data and radio interferometric obser-
vations, resulting in a totally diﬀerent interpretation (i.e.,
a strongly obscured AGN with a two-sided jet). This result
shows that even X-ray observations alone are sometimes
not conclusive (see, e.g., the recent results by Hou et al.
2019 on an [OIII]-selected AGN candidate pair sample,
but see also Comerford et al. 2015, where the invaluable
strength of X-rays to pinpoint and characterize the AGN
emission in [OIII]-selected dual AGN is fully exploited) or
can be misinterpreted if multi-wavelength data of compa-
rable/higher resolution and quality are not available. We
also note that sophisticated analysis techniques may some-
times help in identifying dual AGN (Foord et al., 2019) at
relatively close separations.
One peculiarity of many of the dual systems mentioned
so far is that some members of these systems show no (or
very weak) explicit AGN evidence in their optical/near-
infrared spectra.
A rather common property of these
AGN pairs is that they are heavily dust-enshrouded, with
strong indications of being also heavily obscured in the X-
rays. Investigating a sample of infrared-bright AGN (the
GOALS sample, see more details about sample properties
below), Ricci et al. (2017) found the fraction of Compton-
thick AGN hosted in late-merger galaxies is higher than in
local hard X-ray selected AGN (65+12
−13 vs 27 ± 4 per cent,
see right panel in Fig. 3). More generally, all AGN of their
sample in late-merger galaxies are characterized to have
NH ≥1023 cm−2. Further evidence for high absorption,
with column densities above 1023 cm−2, in an IR (WISE)-
selected sample of interacting/merging galaxies has been
presented by Pfeiﬂe et al. (2019b) (see Sect. 1.3).
10
Similar results have been recently found by De Rosa
et al. (2018), where four Seyfert-Seyfert AGN systems at
low redshift (z < 0.08), selected from SDSS, have been
followed-up by XMM-Newton. They ﬁnd that the X-ray
emission of three out of the eight AGN is consistent with
being absorbed by Compton-thick material, and further
three AGN are in the Compton-thin regime. De Rosa et al.
(2018) also compared the absorption properties in their
dual AGN with those in larger samples observed in X-ray
but selected in diﬀerent ways (optical, IR and hard X-
rays). They found that the fraction of obscured (NH ≥
1022 cm−2) AGN is in the range of 64–90 per cent up to
large-scale separations (∼100 kpc, see left panel in Fig. 3),
i.e. higher than in isolated AGN observed by BAT (43–49
per cent; Ricci et al., 2015).
This behaviour is in agreement with prediction of nu-
merical simulations of isolated black holes (e.g., Capelo
et al. 2017; Blecha et al. 2018; see discussion in Sect. 2.2).
In particular, numerical simulations of AGN in galaxy
mergers show an increase of NH as the distance decreases.
This eﬀect is due to merger dynamics; the median value
of NH was about 3×1023 cm−2, in good agreement with
the value found in the large collection of dual systems pre-
sented by De Rosa et al. (2018). However, these numerical
simulations only probe absorption on relatively large scales
(above ∼50 pc, then absorption from the torus on typical
pc-scale is not considered), therefore the NH value should
be considered as a lower limit.
It is, however, worth mentioning also the recent Chan-
dra observations of eight radio-selected dual AGN in the
Stripe 82 ﬁeld (∼4 −9 kpc separations, Gross et al. 2019)
and seven optically selected dual AGN targeted in X-rays
as part of a complete optical sample of dual systems with
small transverse separations (15–27 kpc, Green et al. 2011;
see also Green et al. 2010). Of these quasars, only one ob-
ject is obscured in X-rays; this result is probably due to
the original selection from the SDSS, being biased towards
systems with low intrinsic extinction. Furthermore, recent
studies of X-ray properties of an SDSS-selected sample of
galaxy pairs, where only one member of the pair exhibits
spectroscopic signatures of AGN activity, indicate a non-
negligible fraction of X-ray unobscured AGN (Guainazzi et
al., in prep.). Intriguingly, galaxy pairs hosting only one
active member show a similar absorption fraction with re-
spect to isolated AGN, i.e. much lower with respect to
AGN in dual systems (as shown in Fig. 3, left panel).
1.2.2. Searching for dual AGN in X-ray survey ﬁelds
Regarding surveys, Silverman et al. (2011) selected kine-
matic pairs (galaxies) in the zCOSMOS ﬁeld (i.e., through
the optical spectroscopy carried out in COSMOS), and
the X-ray coverage was used to probe the fraction of such
galaxies showing nuclear activity, likely triggered by close
galaxy encounters. This fraction seems to increase at sepa-
rations below 75 kpc (projected distance) and line-of-sight
velocity oﬀsets less than 500 km s−1. This result is not
dissimilar to what has been found using SDSS data by
other groups (Satyapal et al. 2014; Ellison et al. 2011, and
references therein)
It is worth mentioning the case of the X-ray COSMOS
source CID-42 at z=0.36 that was found to host two com-
pact nuclei at close separation (≈0.5 arcsec, corresponding
to about 2.5 kpc; see Civano et al. 2010). Optical spec-
troscopy indicates the presence of a large ≈1200 km s−1
velocity oﬀset between the narrow and broad components
of the Hβ emission line (see also Comerford et al. 2009).
The X-ray spectra show an absorbing feature (with an in-
verted P-Cygni proﬁle) at the energy corresponding to iron
line, variable in energy and intensity on year-timescale, in-
dicative of a high-velocity inﬂow (v/c≈0.02-0.14; Civano
et al. 2010; Lanzuisi et al. 2013). Two scenarios may ex-
plain these results: either a GW recoiling black hole (e.g.,
Peres 1962; Campanelli et al. 2007; Blecha et al. 2011) or a
dual AGN system, where one of the two is recoiling because
of slingshot (i.e., a 3-body BH scattering) eﬀect. No ﬁrm
conclusion can be drawn even after follow-up observations,
although high-resolution X-ray data (Civano et al., 2012)
have shown that most of the X-ray emission is coming from
only one nucleus (the South-Eastern one), the other being
most likely a star-forming region, thus potentially favour-
ing the ﬁrst hypothesis.
JVLA 3-GHz data have found
that the emission is associated with the nucleus emitting
in X-rays; the radio spectrum, built up using also broad-
band literature data, is suggestive of a Type 1, radio-quiet
ﬂat-spectrum nucleus (Novak et al., 2015). Overall, the
current observational picture in the radio band is still con-
sistent with the recoiling black hole hypothesis but cannot
rule out the presence of an obscured and radio-quiet SMBH
in the North-Western component.
The study of the triggering mechanism in dual AGN
systems requires complete samples, unbiased towards ob-
scuration as much as possible (as discussed in the pre-
vious subsection).
In this regard, the fraction of dual
AGN has been estimated by Koss et al. (2012) in a sam-
ple of local (z < 0.05), moderate-luminosity AGN selected
from the all-sky hard-X ray Swift/BAT survey. At scales
<100 kpc, the dual AGN frequency is 10 per cent, where
small-separation (< 30 kpc) systems appear to be more
common among the most luminous AGN, and 50 per cent
of the AGN with a very close (<15 kpc) companion are
dual. The fact that the X-ray luminosity of both AGN in-
creases strongly with decreasing galaxy separation further
suggests that merging (as shown by signs of disruption in
the host galaxies by Koss et al. 2010, and of galaxy inter-
actions from morphological studies, Cotini et al. 2013) is
probably the key in powering both active nuclei. In this
regard, X-rays provide better insight into the nuclear ac-
tivity, whereas extinction and dilution by star formation
strongly limit the search for accretion-related activity in
the optical band.
It worth mentioning that in the study of a large sample
of galaxy pairs selected in the mid-IR, the fraction of AGN,
relative to a mass-, redshift- and environment-matched
control sample, increases with decreasing projected sepa-
11
ration (Ellison et al., 2011; Satyapal et al., 2014, see discus-
sion in Sect. 1.3). This evidence further suggests the role
of (close) galaxy encounters in driving gas towards the in-
ner regions of AGN, thus eﬃciently fueling both AGN. As
an example, see the case of the dual AGN system Mrk 739
as detected with Chandra (Koss et al., 2011).
Recently, Koss et al. (2018) have preformed follow-
up high-resolution infrared observations of hard-X-ray-
selected black holes from Swift/BAT. Their study shows
that obscured luminous SMBHs (with Lbol above 2×1044
erg s−1) show a signiﬁcant excess of late-stage nuclear
mergers (17.6 per cent) compared to a sample of inactive
galaxies (1.1 per cent). The link between mergers and ob-
scuration was also found in the COSMOS ﬁeld by Lanzuisi
et al. (2018) using Chandra and HST data; in particular,
they found that the fraction of Compton-thick AGN in
mergers/interacting systems increases with luminosity and
redshift.
1.2.3. C-GOALS: X-ray follow-up of IR-bright galaxies
Iwasawa et al. (2011) presented the X-ray properties
of the GOALS sample (Armus et al., 2009), based on
the X-ray Chandra data on the high infrared-luminosity
complete sample (C-GOALS). Whilst the whole GOALS
sample consists of ∼200 far-IR selected nearby LIRGs,
they focused on a complete sample of 44 systems with log
log(Lir/L⊙) > 11.73 in erg s−1.
The Lir of the 44 systems range from 11.73 to 12.57 with
a median log(Lir/L⊙) = 12.0. Given the selection method,
they were not a priori known to be galaxy mergers, but the
frequency of galaxy mergers turned out to be high. The
number of systems in which clearly separated galaxy nuclei
or galaxies are seen is 26. However, the unresolved galaxies
all show tidal features hinting that they also underwent a
recent galaxy merger. All these LIRGs are dusty objects
and sometimes near-IR imaging was needed to reveal close
pairs (with the nuclear separations smaller than 1 kpc).
The projected nuclear separation spans from 0 to 65 kpc
(Kim et al., 2013), with a median value of 1.6 kpc. When
limited to the 26 resolved systems, the median separation
is 6.7 kpc. Out of the 44 systems, 43 X-ray detections were
recorded. The AGN fraction is 37 per cent when only the
X-ray diagnostics were applied (X-ray colour and Fe Kα
emission line), but this value increases to 48 per cent when
supplemented by the mid-IR line diagnostics (e.g., [Ne v]
λ14.3µm, Petric et al. 2011). This AGN fraction is higher
than that found in the lower-IR luminosity GOALS sample
(Torres-Albà et al., 2018). Among the detected AGN, 9 are
Compton-thick AGN. The AGN frequencies in three cate-
gories of nuclear separation are found as follows: 1) unre-
solved and < 1 kpc: 2/4 and 11/18; 2) 1–10 kpc: 7/15; and
3) > 10 kpc: 2/7. As already discussed above, there might
be a possible tendency of increasing AGN occurrence at
smaller separations in the widened GOALS sample (Ricci
et al., 2017). Double AGN within a single galaxy are rare:
in this category we have only NGC 6240 (Komossa et al.,
2003) and Mrk 273 (Iwasawa et al., 2018), both with sub-
kpc nuclear separations. The X-ray luminosity of AGN
(as observed) spans from log L2−10keV = 40.8 to 43.1 in
units of erg/s, with a median value of 41.65, which are
relatively low for these IR-luminous systems. Absorption
correction ranges from a factor of ∼2 for a moderately
absorbed source to ∼30 for a Compton-thick AGN, and
the average absorption correction is about 1 dex. When
further applying the standard bolometric correction (10–
20, e.g., Marconi et al. 2004; Lusso et al. 2012), the AGN
bolometric luminosity would be estimated to be of the or-
der of 1044 erg/s, i.e. less than 10 per cent of the total
bolometric luminosity of ULIRGs.
1.2.4. High-z X-ray observations of multiple AGN systems
The situation at z > 1 has been poorly investigated
thus far, since detecting distant, possibly obscured AGN
is challenging for Chandra observations of moderate depth.
In this context, we may mention the triple quasar system
at z=2.05 LBQS 1429-0053 (aka QQ1429-008; Djorgovski
et al. 2007), for which a ≈21 ks Chandra pointing al-
lowed the clear detection of the two brightest members of
the system. Although complete samples of dual quasars at
high redshift are not easy to construct (see Hennawi et al.
2010; Findlay et al. 2018) and their complete follow-up in
X-rays would probably require very large projects (of the
order of several-Ms exposures), the few X-ray observations
thus far available have allowed to check whether and how
quasars in the golden quasar epoch are inﬂuenced by the
surrounding environment (i.e., the presence of compan-
ions). In this regard, recently Vignali et al. (2018) have
selected two systems of dual quasars at z=3.0–3.3 drawn
from the Hennawi et al. (2010) sample, hence from the
SDSS-DR6, at separations of 6–8′′ (43–65 kpc), provid-
ing a ﬁrst-order source characterization for both quasars
of each pair thanks to two Chandra 65 ks observations.
All of these quasars have intrinsically high rest-frame 2–
10 keV luminosities (2 × 1044 −5 × 1045 erg s−1), with
signs of obscuration in those quasars showing indications
for broad absorption lines (BAL) in their optical spectra
(hence being classiﬁed either as mini-BAL or BALQSOs).
In particular, one of these four quasars has an order of
magnitude higher optical luminosity than the median value
of SDSS quasars at z=3.3; the possibility that this is due
by chance (and, thus, not because of the presence of a
companion) has been estimated to be of the order of 3 per
cent. In the same work, Vignali et al. (2018) found X-
ray emission from both quasar members of a pair at z=5.0
(projected separation of 21′′, corresponding to 136 kpc),
for which XMM-Newton archival data (≈80 ks) allowed
the authors to detect the two components separately, ﬁnd-
ing unobscured X-ray emission, consistent with their op-
tical classiﬁcation. To our knowledge, this represents the
highest-distance quasar pair ever detected in X-rays.
Still focusing on the quest of multiple AGN systems at
high redshift, an astonishing and very recent ﬁeld of re-
search is given by the discovery of enormous (∼> 200 kpc)
12
Lyα nebulae (ELANe) around
<∼10 per cent of radio-
quiet quasars (e.g., Hennawi et al. 2015, following Hennawi
and Prochaska 2013; see also Cantalupo et al. 2014; Cai
et al. 2017). Up to now, all of them show the presence of
multiple companion AGN. Additional recent detections of
ELANe at high redshift (Fumagalli et al., 2017; Arrigoni
Battaia et al., 2018, 2019) indicate that these structures
are almost ubiquitous found around luminous high-redshift
quasars (mostly thanks to VLT/MUSE, Keck/KCWI, and
the ongoing statistical surveys targeting quasars; this will
be extensively discussed in Sect. 5.3). For comparison, we
note that other less extended and lower-luminosity nebulae
(Borisova et al., 2016) and Lyα blobs (LABs) reported in
literature do not contain multiple AGN. Among ELANe,
the Jackpot Nebula at z = 2 was recently observed with
Chandra (140 ks pointing; Vignali et al., in prep.). This
nebula comprises an extended (≈310 kpc) Lyα emission
region, four AGN in the inner ≈200 kpc plus three addi-
tional AGN on larger scales, identiﬁed by Chandra, likely
at similar redshift, a factor ≈20 overdensity of Lyα emit-
ters, and several submm galaxies probably at the same
redshift. The Chandra detection of extended emission at
the 5.4σ level in the inner region further supports the inter-
pretation of the ﬁeld as hosting a protocluster with a very
high incidence of AGN (Vignali et al., in prep.). ELANe
could help identify high-density regions at high-redshifts,
such as prototclusters, where enhanced multiple AGN ac-
tivity can be favored by halo assembly bias or by physical
interactions in a dense galaxy environment.
1.3. AGN dual detection in near- and mid-infrared
It has been known since the publication of the IRAS
Catalog of Bright Galaxies that most LIRGs and ULIRGs
are interacting/mergers. Later on it was proven that the
fraction of LIRGs/ULIRGs hosting an AGN is higher than
for non-IR bright galaxies; in fact, at the highest luminos-
ity (Lir > 1012 L⊙), nearly all objects appear in advanced
mergers powered by both AGN and circumnuclear star-
bursts, which are fueled by an enormous concentration of
molecular gas that has been funneled into the merger nu-
cleus (Sanders et al., 1988; Sanders and Mirabel, 1996).
Mateos et al. (2017) found that the majority of luminous,
rapidly accreting SMBHs at z ≤1 reside in highly ob-
scured nuclear environments; most of these sources are so
deeply enshrouded that they have so far escaped detection
in <10 keV X-ray wide-area surveys.
WISE (Wright et al., 2010) all-sky mid-IR data proved
to be extraordinarily fruitful in the characterization of
mid-infrared properties of AGN, showing the power of
mid-IR colours as AGN diagnostic tools (e.g., Jarrett
et al. 2011; Stern et al. 2012; Mateos et al. 2012; Rovi-
los et al. 2014; Satyapal et al. 2018). The hot dust sur-
rounding AGN produces a strong mid-infrared continuum,
whose emission can be easily disentangled from that re-
lated to stellar processes via SED-ﬁtting techniques in
both obscured and unobscured AGN. Through a large mid-
infrared study of AGN in mergers and galaxy pairs se-
lected by matching SDSS and WISE data, Satyapal et al.
(2014) found that there is an enhanced fraction of IR-
selected AGN with respect to optically selected AGN in
advanced mergers. They also found that the fraction of
obscured AGN increases with the merger stage, with the
most obscured AGN becoming more prevalent in the most
advanced mergers, where also star formation rates are the
highest (Ellison et al., 2015). There are additional obser-
vational works presenting the close link between mid-IR
selection of AGN and mergers (Donley et al., 2007; Urrutia
et al., 2008; Veilleux et al., 2009; Assef et al., 2013; Glik-
man et al., 2015; Fan et al., 2016; Goulding et al., 2018),
highlighting the fact that a large number of objects are
missed by optical classiﬁcation because of heavy extinc-
tion and calling for a synergic approach in AGN selection
involving diﬀerent wavelengths.
In a similar context, Weston et al. (2017) investigated
the connection between merging/interacting galaxies and
dusty obscured AGN using SDSS and WISE data at
z <∼0.08. The analysis showed a clear link between the
presence of major mergers/interactions and red [3.4] – [4.6]
colour, at least at high (> 1010 M⊙) stellar masses; non-
merging galaxies in a similar mass range are less likely
to have such red mid-IR colour. Thanks to optical spec-
troscopy diagnostics (e.g., BPT diagram, Baldwin et al.
1981), they found that one-quarter of Seyferts show red-
der [3.4] – [4.6] colours than ∼99 per cent of non-Seyferts.
From their sample, AGN are ﬁve times more likely to be
obscured when hosted by a merging galaxy.
Findings in line with these were recently reported by
Pfeiﬂe et al. (2019b) and Satyapal et al. (2017) for sam-
ples of mid-IR selected AGN with signatures of ongoing
interactions. In particular, these authors analysed Chan-
dra and XMM-Newton and near-IR (Large Binocular tele-
scope, LBT) data of a sample of advanced mergers with
nuclear separations below 10 kpc, which were pre-selected
through mid-IR colours using WISE. The combined X-
ray, near-infrared, and mid-infrared data were able to dis-
cover the presence of dual/multiple AGN systems. Satya-
pal et al. (2017) detected the presence of the AGN in a
least four out of the six mergers, with four systems possibly
hosting dual AGN. Pfeiﬂe et al. (2019b) detected at least
one nuclear X-ray source in all 15 mergers analysed in their
work; eight of these systems exhibit two sources suggestive
of dual (or triple) AGN. The high spatial resolution X-ray,
near-IR, and optical spectroscopic diagnostics allowed the
discovery of the triplet system SDSS J084905.51+111447.2
at z = 0.077 (Pfeiﬂe et al., 2019a). It is worth noting that
none of these analysed systems show evidence for AGN in
their optical spectra, probably due to the large extinction.
Support to this interpretation comes from the measured
large nuclear obscuration revealed in X-rays (NH above
1024 cm−2). The absorbed 2–10 keV luminosity in all these
systems is much lower than the mid-IR luminosity (see
Fig. 4). These ﬁndings suggest that the pre-selection in
the mid-IR provides an eﬃcient way to detect dual AGN
in late-mergers, although data at these wavelengths are
13
Figure 4: 2–10 keV observed luminosity vs mid-IR (12 µm) luminos-
ity for the mergers included in the program described in Sect. 1.3
(i.e., X-ray follow-ups of WISE-selected mergers). The plot also in-
cludes the sources already conﬁrmed as dual AGN in the literature.
The samples of hard X-ray selected AGN with the Swift/BAT sur-
vey are also shown; for these AGN, a direct measurement of the
absorbing column density NH is possible (Ricci et al., 2015, 2017).
The dual AGN candidates derived from the WISE selection are the
most heavily absorbed. Dotted lines represent the eﬀect of diﬀerent
absorption column densities on the unabsorbed best-ﬁt linear rela-
tion from the Swift/BAT sample (dashed line). Adapted from Pfeiﬂe
et al. (2019b).
limited in terms of angular resolution and may require in-
formation at other frequencies (e.g., in X-rays) to eventu-
ally provide conclusive results on the presence of nuclear
activity.
A signiﬁcant step forward in terms of angular
resolution, hence in the process of conﬁrmation and char-
acterization of close systems, will be provided by the mis-
sion James Webb Space Telescope, JWST (see Sect. 5.4
for more details on future mid-IR observations). In this
regard, Imanishi and Saito (2014) used high spatial res-
olution K- and L′- band observations to search for dual
AGN in kpc-scale merging systems, previously identiﬁed
in the optical as double-peaked; they found dual AGN in
four systems among the 29 analyzed. This result can be
interpreted assuming that the active phase is not simulta-
neous in the two merging galaxies.
1.4. Dual AGN in the radio waveband
One of the advantages of observations in radio bands
is that the propagation of radio waves is not aﬀected by
dust obscuration. Therefore, radio surveys are an essential
element of multi-wavelength studies. At centimetre wave-
lengths, the radio continuum emission from extragalactic
sources is dominated by non-thermal (synchrotron) emis-
sion from either AGN or star-forming activity. In the for-
mer case, the radio emission originates from ultrarelativis-
tic electrons spiralling around the magnetic ﬁeld lines in
the vicinity of SMBHs. In the case of “normal” galaxies
without AGN, the origin of radio emission is partly by rel-
ativistic electrons accelerated by supernova remnants and
travelling through the magnetic ﬁeld of the galaxy, or free-
free emission from HII regions (for a comprehensive review
of radio emission from galaxies, see Condon, 1992).
Distinguishing between AGN and star formation re-
lated radio-emitting regions requires observations with suf-
ﬁciently high angular resolution. While the radio emission
from AGN is compact and localised to the innermost cen-
tral part of the host galaxy, star-forming activity is dis-
tributed over much larger volumes.
Connected-element radio interferometers, with maxi-
mum baselines of tens of km such as the Karl G. Jan-
sky Very Large Array3 (VLA) or the Australia Telescope
Compact Array4 (ATCA) routinely provide angular reso-
lutions of 1–10 arcsec at cm wavelengths. The electronic
Multi-Element Remotely-Linked Interferometre Network5
(eMERLIN) in the UK, with maximum baselines of a few
hundred km, provides angular resolutions as small as 40
and 150 milliarcsecond (mas) at 6 and 20 cm, respectively.
Such angular scales allow to detect and characterize
not only the compact sources corresponding to the AGN
themselves, but also extended emission in their surround-
ings, such as radio jets or jet-driven outﬂows.
Further-
more, multi-frequency observations give useful spectral in-
formation to discern them: AGN typically show ﬂat spec-
tra, with a few exceptions (O’Dea, 1998), while jet-driven
structures present steeper proﬁles. This makes radio ob-
servations with arcsec resolution a powerful tool to conﬁrm
the nature of multiple AGN systems (e.g., Müller-Sánchez
et al. 2015); this is particularly important given that gas
photoionization from one AGN can create a spurious sig-
nature of a second AGN in optical data, as described in
Sect. 1.1. The highest angular resolution in radio astron-
omy is oﬀered by very long baseline interferometry (VLBI).
By this technique, the radio telescopes do not need to
be physically connected, so the distance between them
can reach thousands of km. The mas angular resolution
achievable by VLBI at cm wavelengths makes it possible
to identify very compact radio sources and indicates that
the brightness temperature of the detected source exceeds
∼106 K. Compact continuum radio sources with such high
brightness temperatures are often associated with AGN,
being the brightness temperature of star-forming galaxies
≲105 K for frequencies above ∼1 GHz (Condon, 1992).
Star-forming activity, gamma-ray bursts, radio supernovae
or their complexes can occasionally reach this limit. How-
ever, transient events are rather rare at radio wavelengths
– only ∼50 supernovae have been detected at radio fre-
quencies after ∼30 years of observations (Lien et al., 2011)
– and the luminosity of star formation quickly drops be-
low detection limits when the redshift of the host galaxy
is larger than ≈0.1. Therefore, based on luminosity and
brightness temperature arguments, if a radio source is de-
tected with VLBI in an extragalactic object at redshift
3http://www.vla.nrao.edu/
4https://www.narrabri.atnf.csiro.au/
5http://www.e-merlin.ac.uk/
14
z ≈0.1 or beyond, it is certain that the emission is AGN-
related (Middelberg et al., 2013) – with the single excep-
tion of hyperluminous IR galaxies at high redshift, some of
which have exceptionally high star-formation rates and can
be partly powered by hyperluminous nuclear starbursts.
For these reasons, VLBI is a powerful tool to separate
AGN from star-forming galaxies above relatively low red-
shifts (z ∼> 0.1). In other words, while connected-element
interferometers are sensitive to both starburst-related and
AGN radio emission spatially blended in the same source,
VLBI with its longer baselines acts as an eﬃcient spatial
ﬁlter for very compact non-thermal AGN radio emission at
z ∼> 0.1. It is therefore a unique observing tool to conﬁrm
the existence of jetted (radio) AGN.6
In the context of dual AGN, the typical mas-scale angu-
lar resolution achievable with VLBI networks at cm wave-
lengths allows us to directly resolve pairs with projected
linear separation as small as about a pc in the local Uni-
verse and ∼10 pc at any redshift. The technique is thus
ideally suited for observing kpc-scale dual AGN (e.g. An
et al., 2018). However, a severe limitation of its applica-
bility is that only a minority of AGN, less than 10 per cent
of the population, are strong (i.e. at least mJy-level) ra-
dio emitters (e.g. Ivezić et al., 2002). Therefore, based on
VLBI observations alone, it is only possible to prove un-
ambiguously the AGN nature of a candidate dual source
if both companions are radio AGN. However, it must be
also remarked that some of the AGN classiﬁed as “radio-
quiet” do show compact radio emission that can be de-
tected with sensitive VLBI observations (e.g. Herrera Ruiz
et al., 2016).
Because of their narrow (typically arcsec-scale) ﬁelds
of view, the use of VLBI networks as “blind” survey in-
struments is also limited, unless wide-ﬁeld observing and
multi-phase-centre correlation techniques are employed
(e.g. Chi et al., 2013; Herrera Ruiz et al., 2017). A more
typical application of VLBI is to study individual objects
or small samples of dual AGN candidates that are selected
based on independent indications of duality. It comes as
no surprise that kpc-scale dual AGN cases conﬁrmed with
VLBI observations are still rare. A systematic study of the
most luminous radio AGN in the multi-frequency VLBI
archive (Burke-Spolaor, 2011) has produced a single case
of a double ﬂat-spectrum core, the nearby radio galaxy
0402+379 (z = 0.055), with two nuclei separated by just
7.3 pc (see Fig. 5, Rodriguez et al. 2006).
Based on the analysis of VLBA (the network of ten radio
antennae located across the United States) data spanning
12 yr, recently Bansal et al. (2017) claimed the detection
of relative motion of the companion AGN. If this is due to
orbital motion, and assuming a circular orbit, the authors
could derive an orbital period of about 3 × 104 yr. While
the VLBI technique is capable to detect positional changes
6In some cases, however, multiple knots in a radio jet can mimic
two AGN.
Figure 5:
Radio VLBA image contours of the system 0402+379 at
8 GHz. Components C1 and C2 correspond to the two radio nuclei
at projected separation of 7.3 pc. From Rodriguez et al. 2006.
of compact components on sub-mas scales, over the cur-
rently available time baselines of several decades, only a
minor part of an assumed orbit can be sampled in a binary
with pc-scale separation. Consequently, the derivation of
the orbital parameters is challenging.
There are practical diﬃculties in deciding which sources
can be regarded as reliably “conﬁrmed” dual AGN. Ide-
ally, at least two diﬀerent methods, based on observing at
multiple wavebands, would be desirable. In this regard,
radio observations also have their role (although with the
already mentioned disadvantage that only a small fraction
of AGN are expected to be strong radio emitters). Care
must also be taken when conducting only low-resolution or
single-frequency measurements, since the observed proper-
ties could be reconciled with several diﬀerent explanations.
For example, based on VLA observations, the quasar
J1023+3243 (z = 0.127), showing double-peaked nar-
row optical emission lines, was found to be a compelling
case for a dual AGN through radio observations (Müller-
Sánchez et al., 2015). Conversely, higher-resolution VLBI
observations, ﬁltering out extended non-AGN emission,
failed to reveal even a single compact radio AGN in
J1023+3243 (Gabányi et al., 2016). This is consistent with
the fact that arcsec-resolution radio imaging alone is not
decisive in conﬁrming AGN duality, as described above.
There are also cases when the interpretation of VLBI ob-
servations is not straightforward. The quasar J1425+3231
(z = 0.478) was found as a kpc-separation dual AGN
candidate based on double-peaked narrow [OIII] emission
lines in its optical spectrum (Peng et al., 2011). Follow-up
VLBI observations of this radio source revealed two com-
pact components separated by 2.6 kpc (Frey et al., 2012),
one of them with a ﬂat and another with a steep radio
spectrum. While both components must be AGN-related
15
synchrotron sources, they are not necessarily associated
with AGN cores. Indeed, sensitive intermediate-resolution
(∼50 −200 mas) e-MERLIN radio images later made it
clear that the steep-spectrum feature is not an AGN core
but instead a hot spot in a kpc-scale lobe.
Therefore,
this quasar is apparently not a dual AGN system, and the
double-peaked optical emission lines are likely related to a
jet-induced symmetric outﬂow from the vicinity of a single
central SMBH (Gabányi et al., 2017).
An example of the debated interpretation of VLBI re-
sults is the case of J1502+1115 (z = 0.390).
Multi-
frequency VLA observations by Fu et al. (2011) showed
that two radio components could be detected at the core
positions separated by 7.4 kpc previously revealed by op-
tical and near-infared measurements. Deane et al. (2014)
reported the surprising result that, based upon their high-
resolution VLBI observations, one of the two radio AGN
contains two ﬂat-spectrum components separated by just
0.14 kpc and interpreted this as J1502+1115 being a triple
radio AGN system. The picture with a close-pair binary
was also supported by the helical pattern of the large-scale
radio jet. The scenario was, however, challenged by Wro-
bel et al. (2014) who argued that the closely-separated
radio components are instead double hot spots energized
by a single SMBH in a compact symmetric object. Sen-
sitive high-resolution multi-frequency VLBI observations
would be needed to give a ﬁnal answer to this debate.
Probably the most spectacular example of a conﬁrmed
dual radio bright AGN is 3C 75 (z = 0.023). The dou-
ble nuclei of the source were ﬁrst mapped in the radio
by Owen et al. (1985) using the VLA. Later, observations
conducted at various wavebands from X-rays to radio re-
vealed that the source is indeed a pair of radio-emitting
AGN separated by ∼8 kpc (Hudson et al., 2006, and ref-
erences therein). The radio interferometric images of the
jets of the two AGN provide a unique opportunity to study
their interaction with each other, and with the intracluster
medium.
2. Theory on dual AGN systems: cosmological and
isolated simulations of mergers
In this section, we extensively discuss cosmological
(Sect. 2.1) and idealized (Sect. 2.2) merger simulations
on the formation of dual AGN. We also describe phys-
ical processes occurring in circumnuclear disks (CNDs;
Sect. 2.3) surrounding BH pairs and discuss their pairing
at
sub-kpc-scale separations.
Whereas large-scale cos-
mological simulations (e.g., modelling of gas inﬂows from
ﬁlaments on evolving galactic halos) enable direct com-
parisons with surveys, idealized merger simulations, which
typically reach a much higher numerical resolution, allow
to follow in greater detail the dynamics and growth of the
SMBHs, and to study systematically the evolution of their
parameters (e.g., mass, spin, and merger times).
2.1. Cosmological Simulations
In the last few years, several cosmological hydrodynamic
simulations have been carried on with the aim at produc-
ing large samples of simulated galaxies (e.g., Magneticum:
Hirschmann et al. 2014; Horizon-AGN: Dubois et al. 2014;
Illustris: Vogelsberger et al. 2014; EAGLE: Schaye et al.
2015; MassiveBlack-II: Khandai et al. 2015; BlueTides:
Feng et al. 2016; MUFASA: Davé et al. 2016; Romu-
lus: Tremmel et al. 2017; IllustrisTNG: Springel et al.
2018), including more and more detailed physical pro-
cesses introduced at sub-grid level, e.g.
star formation
(e.g. Springel and Hernquist, 2002; Schaye and Dalla Vec-
chia, 2008), stellar evolution, supernova feedback, chemi-
cal enrichment (e.g. Tornatore et al., 2003, 2007; Pillepich
et al., 2018), magnetic ﬁelds (e.g. Pakmor et al., 2011;
Pakmor and Springel, 2013), growth of SMBHs and their
associated AGN feedback (e.g. Springel et al., 2005; Fab-
jan et al., 2010; Dubois et al., 2012; Rosas-Guevara et al.,
2015; Steinborn et al., 2015; Weinberger et al., 2017). The
overall properties of the simulated galaxy samples, i.e. the
stellar mass function, the star formation main sequence,
the mass-size relation, and the mass-metallicity relation,
do in general agree surprisingly well with observations,
given the fact that they are produced self-consistently (e.g.
Hirschmann et al., 2014; Steinborn et al., 2015; Remus
et al., 2017; Dolag et al., 2017; Weinberger et al., 2018).
Simulations including SMBHs do also reproduce the ob-
served BH mass function as well as observed scaling rela-
tions between BHs and their host galaxies relatively well,
including the relation between the BH mass M• and the
stellar mass M∗or the M•-σ relation (e.g. Sijacki et al.,
2015; Hirschmann et al., 2014; Steinborn et al., 2015;
Volonteri et al., 2016; Weinberger et al., 2018). In these
simulations, the BH growth is commonly modelled using
the Bondi formalism to compute the accretion rate, limited
to a maximum value of x · ˙MEdd, where x is customarily
set to x = 1 (Springel et al., 2005):
˙M• = max
 4παG2M 2
•⟨ρ∞⟩
(⟨v⟩2 + ⟨cs⟩2)3/2 , x · ˙MEdd

,
(1)
where ⟨ρ∞⟩, ⟨cs⟩, and ⟨v⟩are the mean density, the mean
sound speed, and the mean velocity of the accreted gas rel-
ative to that of the BH, respectively. The empirical boost
factor α has been introduced by Springel et al. (2005) to
compensate for the fact that the resolution is too low to
properly apply the Bondi model. This parameter was orig-
inally set equal to α = 100, but it has been modiﬁed later-
on such to account for the dependence on the gas pressure
(Vogelsberger et al., 2013), on its angular momentum con-
tent (Rosas-Guevara et al., 2015; Tremmel et al., 2017), or
on the gas temperature (Steinborn et al., 2015).
However, despite the variety of existing hydrodynamic
cosmological simulations, only a few of the currently used
BH models are capable of producing AGN pairs with sep-
arations down to kpc scales within a cosmological sim-
ulation.
One reason is that very large volumes are re-
16
quired at relatively high resolutions, making such simula-
tions computationally very expensive. Another reason is
that most of the currently used BH models are not capable
of tracing BHs down to the resolution limit during a galaxy
merger. Speciﬁcally, in most cosmological simulations BHs
are pinned to the gravitational potential minimum (Blecha
et al., 2016; Springel et al., 2005) to avoid that the BHs
become artiﬁcially dislocated from the galaxy centre. Con-
sequently, during a galaxy merger, the two central BHs
merge instantaneously as soon as the two merging galax-
ies are identiﬁed as only one galaxy by the halo ﬁnder.
Since this occurs relatively early during the merger, it is
not possible to directly trace the dynamics and growth of
two BHs during the merger. Making predictions about the
number density of SMBH pairs using such simulations is
only possible indirectly, for example using models like in
Kelley et al. (2017) and in Salcido et al. (2016), making
predictions about GWs from SMBH mergers adding delay
times in post-processing.
However, some authors developed methods to avoid that
the BHs have to be pinned to the potential minimum.
In the cosmological zoom-in simulations from Bellovary
et al. (2010), for example, dark matter (DM) particle
masses are set similar to the gas particle masses in the
high-resolution region. Okamoto et al. (2008) artiﬁcially
drag the BHs along the local density gradients. Dubois
et al. (2012) include dynamical friction from unresolved
gas, while Hirschmann et al. (2014), Tremmel et al. (2015),
and Pﬁster et al. (2019b) use a similar approach by ac-
counting for a dynamical friction force, from stars and
DM, caused by small- and large-scale perturbations of the
surrounding particles (see, e.g., Tremmel et al. 2015 and
references therein for a detailed description). Due to these
perturbations BHs are, equivalently to stars, decelerated
in the direction of their motion (Chandrasekhar, 1943):
∆⃗v = δ⃗v(∆t) −η⃗v∆t.
(2)
Following Chandrasekhar (1943), and assuming that M• is
much larger than the masses of the surrounding particles,
mi, the dynamical friction coeﬃcient η is given by
η = 4πmiM•G2 ⃗v•
v3•
ln
D0 < v2 >
GM•
 Z v•
0
N(vi)dvi, (3)
where D0 is the average distance between the BH and the
surrounding particles, ⃗v• is the velocity of the BH, ⃗vi are
the velocities of the neighboring particles, < v2 > is the
mean square of these velocities, and N(vi) is the according
velocity distribution. Note that only particles with v < v•
are considered in this formula. Such a friction term, how-
ever, is only required when the resolution is too low to
model dynamical friction self-consistently within the sim-
ulation (Beckmann et al., 2018). Alternatively, in the EA-
GLE simulations, BHs are positioned in correspondence
to the potential minimum only below a mass threshold
M• < 100mgas, where mgas is the initial mass of gas parti-
cles (Rosas-Guevara et al., 2019). BH mergers are gener-
M∗> 1010M⊙
M∗> 1011M⊙
z = 0
z = 2
z = 0
z = 2
Horizon-AGN
0.1
2
0.9
11
Magneticum
-
0.19
-
1.7
Table 1: Fraction of dual AGN (per cent) with respect to the to-
tal number of galaxies above the given mass threshold and at the
given redshift, for the Magneticum simulation and the Horizon-AGN
simulation.
ally allowed when the separation and the relative velocity
between the two BHs decrease below certain thresholds.
2.1.1. Fraction of AGN pairs
Due to the large size of the simulations required to pro-
duce AGN pairs, there is either lack of available snapshots
or poor spatial resolution, or too small simulated volumes
to produce AGN pairs within the same time step. Stein-
born et al. (2016) use a simulation with a very large volume
of (128 Mpc/h)3 and a spatial resolution of roughly 2 kpc.
However, the simulation, which is taken from the Mag-
neticum Pathﬁnder simulation set, ran only down to z = 2.
The Horizon-AGN simulation (Volonteri et al., 2016) has
a smaller simulation volume of (100 Mpc/h)3 and a spa-
tial resolution of 1 kpc, but it ran down to z = 0. The
Romulus simulation (Tremmel et al., 2017, 2018) also ran
down to z = 0. Its spatial resolution is about four times
higher than in the Magneticum simulation and twice that
in the Horizon-AGN simulation. However, the simulation
volume is relatively small with (25 Mpc/h)3. To compen-
sate for the small volume, Tremmel et al. (2017) do not
use single snapshots, but all galaxy mergers across cosmic
time.
In order to compare diﬀerent simulations, we need to
adopt the same selection criteria, in particular the same
spatial separations between two AGN (typically < 10 kpc)
and the same galaxy and AGN luminosity threshold. Of-
ten, AGN are simply selected through their bolometric
luminosity, and a typical threshold is Lbol > 1043 erg s−1.
When comparing simulations with observations, one has to
be aware of the fact that such a selection does not include
any obscuration eﬀects. In addition, simulations make dif-
ferent assumptions on the modelling of the galaxies and
their SMBHs, leading to very diﬀerent predictions. State-
of-the-art simulations of galaxy mergers are still in their
infancy in tracking the dynamics and growth of SMBHs
realistically, and it is still challenging to reproduce the ob-
served properties of AGN and SMBHs as a function of
redshift.
To demonstrate this, Table 1 shows a comparison of the
dual AGN fractions in the Magneticum simulation run by
Steinborn et al. (2016) and the Horizon-AGN simulation
by Volonteri et al. (2016). At z = 2, the Horizon-AGN
simulation (Volonteri et al., 2016) predicts a dual AGN
fraction of 2 per cent (11 per cent) with respect to all
17
galaxies above M∗> 1010M⊙(M∗> 1011M⊙).
The Magneticum simulation run predicts much lower
dual AGN fractions: 0.19 per cent and 1.7 per cent for
galaxies above M∗> 1010M⊙and M∗> 1011M⊙, respec-
tively. There might be several reasons for these discrep-
ancies, most of them being related to selection criteria, as
speciﬁed above, for dual AGN (such as the threshold for
BH mass, galaxy mass, AGN luminosity, and Eddington
ratio). A minor eﬀect is the slightly diﬀerent deﬁnition of
dual AGN. For the Magneticum simulation result we in-
clude only AGN pairs with proper separations < 30 kpc,
whereas Volonteri et al. (2016) include also AGN pairs
with larger separations. However, only a very small frac-
tion of their dual AGN have separations above 30 kpc,
making this point negligible. More importantly, Horizon-
AGN selects dual AGN using a threshold for galaxy mass,
whereas Magneticum uses a threshold on BH mass (equal
for both AGN, M• > 107M⊙); assuming the same crite-
ria on BH mass in Horizon-AGN, the dual AGN fraction
is closer to the one reported in Magneticum (0.6 per cent
at z = 2). Also, imposing the same BH mass threshold
as in the Magneticum simulation will select systems with
mass ratio close to one, that will increase the paucity of
the selected dual AGN systems. The number density of
AGN in general is much larger in the Horizon-AGN sim-
ulation than in the Magneticum simulation. Speciﬁcally,
the faint luminosity end of the luminosity function from
the Horizon-AGN simulation is over-predicted, compared
to observations from Hopkins et al. (2007). In contrast,
the Magneticum simulation under-predicts the number of
luminous AGN, but agrees with Hopkins et al. (2007) at
the low-luminosity end. Since faint AGN are the major-
ity of all AGN, this leads to a much larger number den-
sity of AGN and, thus, also of dual AGN. One reason for
these diﬀerences might be the diﬀerences in the AGN feed-
back model. In particular, the model from Steinborn et al.
(2015), which is used in the Magneticum simulation run,
suppresses BH growth much earlier than in the feedback
model used in the Horizon-AGN simulation. Particularly
at z = 2, this leads to a larger fraction of quiescent galax-
ies with respect to star-forming galaxies. Assuming that
AGN activity and star formation activity are driven by the
same mechanisms, this implies a generally smaller fraction
of AGN. However, since observations also predict very dif-
ferent AGN luminosity functions (e.g. Lacy et al., 2015),
it is still unclear which simulations give better predictions.
Thus, any predictions of dual AGN fractions with respect
to the overall galaxy sample, from simulations as well as
from observations, have to be taken with great caution.
Next, we compare the redshift evolution of the dual
AGN fraction and the fraction of BH pairs with only one
active BH of the Magneticum simulation run presented in
Steinborn et al. (2016) with Horizon-AGN and with the
largest EAGLE simulation run (Fig. 6). The datapoints
from Rosas-Guevara et al. (2019, EAGLE) are shown as
cyan (one AGN) and orange (dual AGN) ﬁlled circles and
the Magneticum simulation results are represented by dark
Figure 6: Fraction of dual AGN (red, orange, and yellow datapoints)
and BH pairs with only one AGN (dark blue, cyan, and light blue dat-
apoints) with respect to the total number of AGN, for Magneticum
(red and dark blue diamonds), EAGLE (orange and cyan circles,
taken from Rosas-Guevara et al. 2019), and Horizon-AGN (yellow
and light blue squares). For all simulations we include only AGN
pairs with Lbol > 1043 erg s−1and a proper separation < 30 kpc,
while for Magneticum and Horizon-AGN we also apply a BH mass
cut of M• > 107M⊙for one BH.
blue (one AGN) and red (dual AGN) diamonds. The data-
points for Horizon-AGN are shown in light blue (one AGN)
and yellow (dual AGN). To be able to compare the two
simulations, we again adopt the same selection criterion
for the Magneticum simulation like in Rosas-Guevara et al.
(2019), which is a proper separation of < 30 kpc. For Mag-
neticum and Horizon-AGN, we apply the same BH mass
cut of M• > 107M⊙. While the dual AGN fractions pre-
dicted by the simulations agree very well with each other,
the fraction of BH pairs with one AGN is generally increas-
ing in the EAGLE and Horizon-AGN simulations, whereas
in the Magneticum simulation it is decreasing, at least
above z ∼3.
For z ≲3.5 the Magneticum simulation
has a signiﬁcantly larger fraction of such pairs than the
EAGLE simulation, but similar to Horizon-AGN.
We stress here the importance of the exact deﬁnitions
of both numerator and denominator in deﬁning these frac-
tions and their redshift evolution. As noted above, impos-
ing a galaxy mass cut is not the same as imposing a BH
mass cut, since the choice, when coupled with a luminosity
threshold, impacts the Eddington ratio distribution of the
selected population. For instance, in the case of Horizon-
AGN at z = 2, the dual AGN fraction is 0.8 per cent tak-
ing only a Lbol > 1043 erg s−1threshold and it is basically
constant with redshift; the fraction becomes 2.4 per cent
if applying also a galaxy mass cut of M∗> 1010M⊙and
it increases strongly from low to high redshift. Applying
the luminosity cut and a BH mass cut of M• > 107M⊙to
18
both BHs in the pair the fraction at z = 2 is 0.6 per cent
and it decreases somewhat at z > 2, ﬁnally when applying
the same BH mass cut to one AGN only the fraction at
z = 2 is 1.3 per cent and it increases weakly from z = 0 to
z = 4 (see ﬁg. 6).
Furthermore, when comparing with observations, it is
imperative to adopt the same approach. For instance, ap-
plying the same luminosity threshold to the sample, as
done in these examples, diﬀers from selecting all AGN
above a luminosity threshold and then looking at which
of these have a companion that can be somewhat fainter.
While it is understandable that the choice of deﬁnition
is sometimes forced by the parent sample properties, one
needs to check carefully whether the same deﬁnitions are
used, before performing a comparison.
However, predictions have to be taken with caution. For
instance, to avoid spurious scattering, the Magneticum
simulation uses two masses, a “real” mass and a “dynam-
ical mass”. The “real” mass is used to calculate gas ac-
cretion and feedback, whereas the “dynamical mass” is
used for gravity as long as the BH mass is not large
enough to avoid wandering caused by numerical noise (see
Hirschmann et al. 2014 and Steinborn et al. 2015 for de-
tails).
In that way they have a relatively smooth tran-
sition between the galaxy without and, then, with a BH
hole, which would otherwise cause too much AGN feedback
right after seeding the BH. However, since the “real” mass
is diﬀerent from the “dynamical mass”, which determines
the motion of gas near the BH, for these BHs it is uncer-
tain whether they would also be active if their mass had
been larger and exerted a stronger feedback (see Steinborn
et al. 2016). Higher redshifts, where many BHs are seeded,
should be aﬀected more than lower redshifts. This could
explain the diﬀerence between EAGLE and Magneticum
in Fig. 6.
In contrast to Volonteri et al. (2016), Steinborn et al.
(2016), and Rosas-Guevara et al. (2019), Tremmel et al.
(2018) concentrate on haloes with Milky Way-like masses
at z = 0. They ﬁnd that multiple SMBHs within 10 kpc
from the galaxy centre are very common in such low-mass
haloes: on average, they host 5.1 ± 3.1 SMBHs, indepen-
dent of the merger history and morphology. This implies
that SMBH pairs and multiplets might be common (for
early predictions giving similar numbers for Milky Way-
size galaxies, see Volonteri and Perna, 2005; Bellovary
et al., 2010). However, AGN activity and, in particular,
dual AGN activity is very rare in these haloes since oﬀ-
center BHs tend to avoid the gaseous disk.
One expla-
nation for the large amount of BH pairs and multiplets
(Tremmel et al., 2018) is that SMBHs often spend a long
time getting to the centre (Tremmel et al., 2017).
The
results from Tremmel et al. (2018) are very diﬀerent from
those of Steinborn et al. (2016), who ﬁnd only 35 BH pairs
in total. One reason might be the diﬀerent redshifts, which
would imply that the number of oﬀset SMBHs must in-
crease strongly between z = 2 and z = 0, probably due to
mergers. Furthermore, Tremmel et al. (2018) and Stein-
born et al. (2016) use diﬀerent mass ranges due to the
diﬀerent resolutions and simulation volumes. More likely,
however, the discrepancies originate from the diﬀerent res-
olutions, seeding criteria and the slightly diﬀerent dynami-
cal descriptions of SMBHs. This, as widely discussed here,
demonstrates again that current cosmological simulations
have to be taken with caution when making predictions
for the amount of SMBH pairs and thus, for the fraction
of dual AGN.
2.1.2. Conditions for the formation of dual AGN
Although cosmological simulations are not able to make
reliable predictions for the fraction of AGN pairs, they are
very useful for making predictions about general trends re-
garding dual AGN, for example in comparison either to in-
active SMBH pairs or to SMBH pairs with only one active
BH. In particular, Steinborn et al. (2016) and Volonteri
et al. (2016) agree in the following points, both being in
agreement with simulations of isolated mergers (Sect. 2.2):
• The probability for dual AGN activity increases with
decreasing distance between the BHs.
• The BH mass ratio of dual AGN is close to unity.
Cosmological simulations do not only produce AGN
pairs self-consistently in a cosmological context, but they
also contain more information than observations.
Most
importantly, the time evolution can give insights into the
formation and trigger mechanisms of dual AGN. In par-
ticular, Steinborn et al. (2016) conclude:
• Dual AGN do, on average, require a larger gas reser-
voir than single AGN. They are not only driven by
internal gas of the host galaxy, but also by gas which
has recently been accreted by the galaxy, for example
from cold gas ﬁlaments or clumpy accretion.
• Only when both SMBHs have similar BH masses, they
are both able to be active.
As soon as one BH is
signiﬁcantly more massive than its counterpart, its
gravitational potential accumulates and heats the gas
even in the vicinity of the smaller BH, suppressing its
accretion which could otherwise be accreted by the
less massive BH.
Both these conclusions agree with those obtained from
idealized simulation (see Sect. 2.2 on BH activity) and with
observing data that reveal a more obscured environment in
dual AGN with respect to isolated systems (see Sect. 1.2).
Although the speciﬁc dynamical description of BHs, as
well as the underlying AGN models used in cosmologi-
cal simulations have to be reﬁned, current state-of-the-art
cosmological simulations already have important implica-
tions for the interpretation of observations as well as of
simulations of isolated mergers. In particular, dual AGN
activity is not simply a tracer of galaxy mergers, since
many inactive BH pairs and multiplets with kpc-scale sep-
arations exist, which are not necessarily linked to a recent
19
merger (Tremmel et al., 2018). Furthermore, the results
from Steinborn et al. (2016) suggest that having a closer
look onto the detailed morphology as well as onto the en-
vironment of galaxies which host dual AGN might give
further insights into their driving mechanisms. Since the
accretion of gas onto the galaxy seems to play a major role
(Steinborn et al., 2016), it will be particularly interesting
to have a look at how the gas is accreted by the galaxy
and how it is driven towards the centre.
2.2. Isolated Mergers
The dynamics of isolated galaxy mergers have been pre-
sented in a plethora of studies, from the early works of,
e.g., Holmberg (1941) and Toomre and Toomre (1972), to
the extensive research in the 1990’s (e.g. Barnes and Hern-
quist, 1991; Barnes, 1992; Barnes and Hernquist, 1996)
and 2000’s (e.g. Cox et al., 2008). Only in the past two
decades did merger simulations start to include the dynam-
ics and/or growth of massive BHs (e.g. Di Matteo et al.,
2005; Hopkins et al., 2006; Younger et al., 2008; Johansson
et al., 2009; Hopkins and Quataert, 2010; Callegari et al.,
2009, 2011; Van Wassenhove et al., 2012, 2014; Hayward
et al., 2014; Colpi, 2014; Capelo et al., 2015; Volonteri
et al., 2015a,b; Gabor et al., 2016; Capelo et al., 2017;
Pﬁster et al., 2017; Khan et al., 2018). In this subsection,
we limit our discussion to the few studies that focused on
the theoretical predictions of observational signatures of
single or double AGN activity.
2.2.1. Link between merger dynamics and AGN fuelling
As an illustrative case, we discuss the dynamical evo-
lution of one of the mergers presented in Capelo et al.
(2015), in which the initial mass ratio between the two
galaxies as well as between the two BHs is 1:4, the merger
is coplanar (i.e. both disk planes lie on the merger orbital
plane), and the internal angular momenta of the two disks
are both aligned with the merger angular momentum (1:4
coplanar, prograde–prograde merger; Run 07 in the orig-
inal paper). The simulation starts when the two galaxies
are on a parabolic orbit and separated by ∼70 kpc, cor-
responding to the sum of the two galaxy virial radii. Six
snapshots highlighting the main phases of the merger are
shown in Fig. 7: the ﬁrst panel shows a very early stage,
before the ﬁrst encounter, whereas in the second panel
the tidal perturbations onto the two galaxies are clearly
visible after the ﬁrst pericentre. The fourth panel shows
the extremely close second pericentre, when the two galax-
ies actually pass through each other, drastically changing
their own morphologies, with the by far larger eﬀect being
observable on the gas component of the secondary galaxy
(as shown at the second apocentre in the ﬁfth panel). The
sixth panel shows the galactic remnant ∼1.5 Gyr after the
beginning of the run, when the galaxy merger has termi-
nated.
The simulation (as well as the other runs in Capelo et al.,
2015) has a high mass and spatial resolution (3.3 × 103
M⊙and 10 pc for stellar particles, 4.6×103 M⊙and 20 pc
for gas) and has been designed to save a full output of
the run with an extremely high cadence, allowing for a
detailed analysis of the impact of the merger on the stel-
lar and gaseous components of the two systems. Fig. 8
presents a direct comparison between the BH separation
(upper panels), the evolution of the BH mass, and the
dynamical properties of the gas in the primary (left-hand
panels) and secondary (right-hand panels) host galaxies.
The accretion rates onto both the primary and secondary
BH (second row of panels) evolve from an initial stage
of relatively low values with small ﬂuctuations (stochas-
tic phase, as dubbed in Capelo et al., 2015) to a second
bursting phase (merger phase), starting immediately after
the huge perturbation occurring at the second pericentre
(see Fig. 7) and lasting until the merger completion. The
accretion burst is correlated with strong variations in the
gas angular momentum (see the third row of panels in
Fig. 8). This is especially true for the secondary galaxy,
where a clear angular momentum loss is observable along
with a 90-degree re-orientation of the gas angular momen-
tum. The end of the merger phase shows a second orbital
ﬂip in the secondary, after which the run enters the rem-
nant phase, in which the separation between the two BHs
is poorly resolved and the two objects accrete from the
same gas reservoir.
The main physical process responsible for the violent
evolution of the gas angular momentum and, as a conse-
quence, of the burst of accretion onto the secondary BH
is ram-pressure, as discussed in Capelo and Dotti (2017;
see also Barnes 2002 and Blumenthal and Barnes 2018
for similar larger-scale results) and shown in Fig. 9. The
four columns refer to four diﬀerent times centred around
the beginning of the merger phase, from immediately be-
fore to immediately after the second pericentre. It can be
noted that the distribution of stars belonging to the sec-
ondary galaxy is tidally perturbed, being elongated in the
radial direction toward the primary galaxy, and develops
clear tidal tails after the interaction (bottom row). The
evolution of the gas component is, however, very diﬀerent,
as shown in the top and middle rows. A strong hydrody-
namical interaction is observable as soon as the two gas
components interact, creating a clear shock front in the
secondary gas and braking it (second column). Such decel-
eration of the gas (with respect to the stellar component of
its host) is even more visible at the pericentre, and results
in the gas being dynamically decoupled from the stars.
A fraction of the gas unbinds from the secondary galaxy
and gets accreted by the primary galaxy (upper-rightmost
panel), but the majority of the gas remains bound to the
secondary, with a signiﬁcantly smaller angular momentum,
forming a dense nuclear disk that is counter-rotating with
respect to the stars.
As discussed in Capelo and Dotti (2017), such strong
perturbation depends on the dynamical properties of the
encounter, and a complete ﬂip of the gas orbital plane is
not expected to be ubiquitous. In addition to this process,
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 7: Stellar (red) and gas (blue) density snapshots (viewed face-on) at representative times of a 1:4 coplanar, prograde–prograde merger
(ﬁrst described in Capelo et al. 2015; Run 07): (1) 0.196, (2) 0.391, (3) 0.880, (4) 0.973 (second pericentric passage), (5) 1.055, and (6)
1.561 Gyr. The primary (secondary) galaxy starts the parabolic orbit on the left (right) of the ﬁrst snapshot, moving right (left) wards. In
order to make the gas more visible, gas density was overemphasized with respect to stellar density. Each image’s size is 70 × 70 kpc. Adapted
from Capelo et al. (2015).
the above-mentioned tidal torques can lead to deviations
from axisymmetry in the stellar components, further sup-
porting the gas inﬂow (e.g. Hernquist, 1989; Barnes and
Hernquist, 1991, 1996; Mihos and Hernquist, 1996). These
early works, in fact, showed that the role of hydrodynam-
ical torques is negligible (see, e.g., Fig. 10), possibly due
to a combination of lower resolution and the less accu-
rate treatment of hydrodynamics in earlier versions of the
smoothed particle hydrodynamic (SPH) methods. The dif-
ferent relative importance of ram pressure with respect to
tidal torques in driving nuclear activity will depend on the
diﬀerent galaxy mass ratios, impact parameters, etc., and
a broad parametric study aiming at quantifying the rela-
tive impact of the two processes has not been presented to
date.
2.2.2. Dual AGN properties and occurrence
Since merger-driven tidal torques and ram-pressure
shocks eﬃciently funnel gas into the central regions of
the merging galaxies, where the BHs lie, we expect some
level of dual-AGN activity associated with galaxy mergers.
This, however, is diﬃcult to quantify, given the extreme
complexity of such systems, wherein one needs to take into
account many physical processes (e.g., DM, stellar, and gas
dynamics; star formation and stellar feedback; radiative
cooling; BH accretion and feedback; etc.). High-resolution
numerical simulations are therefore needed to study this
process, in order to understand how, when, and why and
to predict when two BHs may accrete at the same time. In
this respect, suites of high-resolution isolated merger sim-
ulations are particularly useful, as one can appreciate the
importance of any given BH, merger, or galactic property
by varying one parameter at the time.
Diﬀerent numerical investigations have been performed
to test the eﬀects of galaxy morphology (disk versus ellipti-
cal; e.g. Van Wassenhove et al., 2012), bulge-to-disk stellar
mass ratio (Blecha et al., 2013, 2018), orbital conﬁgura-
tion, BH mass, and BH feedback eﬃciency (Capelo et al.,
2017), and primary-to-secondary-galaxy and gas-to-stellar
mass ratios (all of the above references). They all agree on
dual AGN activity being more eﬃciently promoted during
the last stages of galaxy mergers, when the two BHs are
21
Figure 8: Temporal evolution of several quantities of the primary (left-hand panels) and secondary (right-hand panels) galaxy of a 1:4 coplanar,
prograde–prograde merger (see also Fig. 7). In all panels, the vertical, dotted, black lines show the separation between the stochastic, the
merger, and the remnant stage. First panel: separation between the two BHs. Second panel: BH accretion rate (solid line) and BH Eddington
accretion rate (dotted line). Third panel: magnitude of the gas speciﬁc angular momentum l in 10 concentric shells of 100-pc thickness around
the local centre of mass near the BH, in the inner kpc; l grows monotonically with radius at the beginning and at the end of the run. Fourth
panel: same as the third panel, but for the polar angle of the speciﬁc angular momentum vector. Adapted from Capelo et al. (2015).
separated by less than 1–10 kpc. This last stage is, how-
ever, shorter than the initial galaxy pairing phase, when
the average BH luminosities are lower and most often not
simultaneous.
To compute the chances of observing an
AGN pair, one has to consider all of the above-mentioned
eﬀects. Moreover, these chances strongly depend on the
observational window that is used to search for AGN pairs,
as detailed in the following.
In order to have a more meaningful comparison with ob-
servations, Capelo et al. (2017) used the results of their set
of simulations to predict hard X-ray luminosities. This ob-
servational band is way less aﬀected than the optical one
by obscuration (e.g. Koss et al., 2010).
Indeed, Capelo
et al. (2017) checked for the eﬀect of obscuration on re-
solvable scales (>100 pc, i.e. neglecting any eﬀects from
nuclear tori), and found it to be negligible for high-redshift
(z = 3) galaxies and moderate for local galaxies, produc-
ing a change in the dual-activity time-scales by a factor of
∼2. They also computed projected (rather than 3D) BH
separations and relative velocities, to make the comparison
with observations more direct.7
The link between simulated merger history and dual-
AGN activity is shown in Fig. 11 for one major merger
of the suite of Capelo et al. (2017) – the 1:2 coplanar,
prograde–prograde merger with 30 per cent disk gas frac-
tion and 0.1 per cent BH feedback eﬃciency (Run 02 in
the original paper). In the left-hand panels, we show the
time the two BHs spend above a given projected separation
(top panel) and velocity diﬀerence (bottom panel), assum-
ing several 2–10 keV luminosity thresholds, from 2 × 1041
to 2 × 1043 erg s−1 (from top to bottom).
In the low-
luminosity cases, the BHs are both active for a signiﬁ-
cant fraction of the encounter and, as a consequence, the
curves simply follow the orbital history of the BHs. In the
high-luminosity cases, dual activity occurs only during the
merger stage, at low (projected) separations. The solid line
7The usage of projected quantities is crucial, as dual-AGN time-
scales can diﬀer by factors of up to ∼4 at a given separation/relative
velocity.
22
101
103
105
107
109
Figure 9: Detailed evolution of a 1:4 coplanar, prograde–prograde merger (see also Fig. 7 and Fig. 8) at times close to the second pericentric
passage (from left to right: 0.948, 0.963, 0.978, and 1.002 Gyr). Top row: positions of the gas particles of both galaxies, with the gas originally
within 3 kpc from the secondary galaxy’s centre marked in green. Middle row: density map of the gas originally within 3 kpc from the centre
of the secondary. Bottom row: same as the middle row, but for the stars. The colour bar shows the (logarithmic) density scale in units of
2.2 × 105 M⊙kpc−3 for the middle and bottom rows. Adapted from Capelo and Dotti (2017).
corresponds to the case when L2−10 keV = 1042.3 erg s−1,
which is typically used as the threshold to deﬁne an AGN
(Silverman et al., 2011). This luminosity case is further
exempliﬁed in the right-hand panels of Fig. 11, where the
dual-AGN time is shown as a function of luminosity ra-
tio, projected separation, and projected velocity diﬀerence,
and in which the higher-density time-clouds are related to
the apocentric passages, where the residence time is longer.
We stress that the quoted relative velocities in Capelo
et al. (2017) should be considered as a broad estimate more
than an actual prediction of the velocity shift measurable
through optical spectroscopy, as these were obtained by
projecting the 3D relative velocity between the two BHs
along the line of sight.
Such assumption does not take
into account the size and dynamics of the NLRs. These
eﬀects were considered by Blecha et al. (2013) through a
post-processing analysis of a merger simulation suite, who
found that only a minority of double-peaked NLR were
directly linked to the relative motion of massive BHs.
Simulations of isolated galaxy mergers (see also recent
studies by Solanes et al. 2019 and Yang et al. 2019) cannot
provide any prediction on the fraction of AGN pairs out
of the total number of AGN (for that, large-scale cosmo-
logical simulations are needed; see Sect. 2.1). However, it
is possible to compute the dual-activity time, normalised
by the activity time (deﬁned as the time when at least one
BH is active), and compare this quantity to observed frac-
tions of dual AGN systems out of interacting systems in
which at least one system is known to host an AGN. This
is shown in Fig. 12, where such normalised dual-activity
time for all the mergers in the suite of Capelo et al. (2017)
is compared to data from the all-sky Swift-BAT survey
23
Figure 10: Speciﬁc torques acting on the gas at the centre of the face-
on disk in a gas-rich equal-mass merger between two disk galaxies,
as a function of time (with the units of length, mass, and time being
roughly 40 kpc, 2.2 × 1011 M⊙, and 250 Myr, respectively). In this
relatively low-resolution simulation, the gravitational torques exerted
on the gas by the rest of the system (open circles) are much stronger
than those due to hydrodynamic forces (star symbols), as opposed
to the high-resolution case described in Figs 7–9. From Barnes and
Hernquist (1991).
(Koss et al., 2012). Remarkably, both major and minor
simulated mergers are consistent (to within a factor of ∼2
in time) with the observations.
Moreover, it is also possible to compute the dual-activity
time, divided by the total merger time, and compare it to
cosmological simulations which provide the fraction of dual
AGN out of the total number of BH pairs. In this case,
when comparing, for example, major-merger dual-activity
times of isolated mergers (Capelo et al., 2017) to the cos-
mological run by Steinborn et al. (2016; see Sect. 2.1),
they are within a factor of ∼2 from each other.
Although less direct than the X-ray based selections,
infrared studies of dual AGN activity allow to build signif-
icantly larger samples, as current X-ray surveys are mostly
comparatively shallower. However, mid-IR bands can be
contaminated by star formation, often enhanced in merg-
ers, and particular care has to be taken in characteriz-
ing the IR (dual-)AGN selection criteria (Hainline et al.,
2016).
Blecha et al. (2018) performed eight hydrodynamic sim-
ulations of isolated mergers with resolution and gas frac-
tion comparable to the ones discussed above, and a mass
ratio of 1:2 (as the case shown in Fig. 11), except for two
runs exploring the extreme cases 1:1 and 1:5, varying the
bulge-to-total stellar mass ratio in the range 0–0.2 (slightly
lower with respect to the 0.22 mass ratio in the two runs
mentioned above). They coupled the galaxy evolution to
dust radiative transfer in post processing, to quantify the
mid-IR observability of (single and) dual AGN. The post-
processing analysis misses the contribution of structures on
unresolved scales (similarly to the case in Capelo et al.,
2017), but we stress that the input SED for the AGN they
used includes a mid-IR contribution by a sub-resolution
dusty torus.
Figure 13 shows the optical to IR SEDs of a major
(mass ratio 1:2), gas-rich (Mgas/M⋆,disc = 0.3, for both
galaxies) merger involving two massive bulge-less galaxies
(Run A1A0 in Blecha et al., 2018), for the cases in which
the contribution from the AGN SED was included (solid
line) or not (dotted line). The emission in the upper panel
(corresponding to the ﬁrst time at which the separation
between the two BHs drops below 10 kpc) is clearly dom-
inated by star formation, and the AGN contribution is
negligible. A clear increase in the IR emission due to the
AGN contribution and the reddening of the mid-IR colours
are evident immediately after the ﬁnal pairing of the BHs
(lower panel).
We stress that our discussion applies to
low-redshift (z < 0.5) mergers, where the optical/near-IR
peak of star formation has a limited impact on the W1
and W2 WISE bands (see Sect. 1.3 and Blecha et al. 2018
for a discussion about the limitations of the IR selection
at higher redshifts).
Blecha and collaborators used their results to provide
an a-priori estimate of the completeness and purity of
AGN samples selected with diﬀerent IR colour criteria.
As shown in Fig. 14 for the run discussed above, a single-
colour criterion either misses a signiﬁcant fraction of AGN
(when the W1-W2 threshold is too high), or it is contami-
nated by star formation (for lower W1-W2 thresholds). A
two-colour selection criterion such as the one proposed by
Jarrett et al. (2011) performs better, but does not max-
imise completeness and purity at the same time. The re-
sults of the diﬀerent runs have then been used to engineer
a new simulation-informed criterion, shown with the blue
solid line in Fig. 14.
The analysis performed by Blecha et al. (2018) suggests
that mid-IR selection can be very eﬀective at identifying
AGN hosts in mergers (see also Sect. 1.3). Using the same
simulations, they estimated the expected fraction of dual
AGN in each merger stage, based on the fraction of time at
each separation when both BHs are simultaneously active,
and found that up to ∼80 per cent of the mergers with a
projected separation <3 kpc could host a pair of accreting
BHs, making the mid-IR-based samples of dual-AGN can-
didates the ideal ballpark for X-ray follow-ups and the per-
fect targets for future sub-kpc imaging and spectroscopy
with the JWST (see Sect. 5.4 for more details on future
mid-IR observations).
In conclusion, we are still far from a detailed picture
of the connection between mergers and (dual) AGN activ-
ity. AGN obscuration and variability on scales shorter and
smaller than the typical temporal and spatial resolution of
idealised merger simulations cannot be taken into account.
This, together with the fact that dust obscuration from
the torus in the vicinity of the BHs is also not currently
resolved, likely leads to an over-estimate of the X-ray dual-
AGN time, possibly resulting in an uncertain one-to-one
association between mid-IR-selected double AGN and de-
tected X-ray pairs. Moreover, these results may be sen-
sitive to which numerical method is employed (e.g. Hay-
ward et al., 2014; Gabor et al., 2016) and to the speciﬁc
implementation of BH dynamics (e.g. Lupi et al., 2015a,b;
Biernacki et al., 2017), accretion (e.g. Debuhr et al., 2010;
24
−3.0
−1.5
0.0
1.5
3.0
log10(Lbol,1 /Lbol,2)
−1
0
1
2
log10(r [kpc])
0
150
300
450
600
v [km s−1 ]
104
105
106
107
108
tdual−AGN [yr]
Figure 11: Dual-activity time for a 1:2 coplanar, prograde–prograde merger (ﬁrst described in Capelo et al. 2015; Run 02). Left-hand panels:
time above a given projected separation r (top panel) and velocity diﬀerence v (bottom panel) between the two BHs, for several 2–10 keV
luminosity thresholds [1041.3 (dash-triple-dot), 1041.8 (dash-dot), 1042.3 (solid), 1042.8 (dash), and 1043.3 (dot) erg s−1]. The squares indicate
the time regardless of any r or v ﬁlter (i.e. r = v = 0), whereas the circles indicate r = 1 and 10 kpc, and 150 km s−1. Right-hand panels:
time as a function of projected separation and velocity diﬀerence (bottom panel), and bolometric-luminosity ratio between the two BHs (top
panel), for the luminosity threshold L2−10 keV = 1042.3 erg s−1. Each side is divided in 30 bins (∆log10(r [kpc]) = 0.1, ∆v = 20 km s−1, and
∆log10(Lbol,1/Lbol,2) = 0.2). Adapted from Capelo et al. (2017).
Hopkins and Quataert, 2011), and feedback (e.g. Newton
and Kay, 2013). Finer resolution and improved subgrid
recipes will be helpful to gain a better understanding of
these complex systems.
2.2.3. Stalling BH pairs as tight dual AGN
The above mentioned studies (e.g. Capelo et al., 2017;
Blecha et al., 2018) have performed a detailed analysis of
only one particular type of merger (with gas rich, though
non-clumpy, massive disk galaxies). Even though a sys-
tematic study expanding upon this region of parameters
has not been done, it is interesting to note that the dynam-
ics and possible detection of BHs can vary signiﬁcantly if
one studies diﬀerent types of galaxies, e.g., if there is little
(or much more) gas, or if the structure of the galaxy is
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
In particular, some processes can produce BH pair
stalling at sub-kpc separations, and such stalling BH pairs
could be detectable as tight dual AGN. Such processes
are more numerous in gas-rich environments (e.g. Fiacconi
et al., 2013; Tamburello et al., 2017; Souza Lima et al.,
2017), contrary to previous expectations that gas-rich me-
dia would be more conducive to fast decay and binary for-
mation (e.g. Mayer, 2013). Additionally, low-mass/dwarf
galaxies oﬀer a special environment where slow orbit de-
caying or even stalling can occur, albeit for reasons diﬀer-
ent from those playing a role in normal galaxies. Below
we list some of the regimes that are relevant.
In each
of these regimes, a quantity of interest, which has clear
observational implications, is the characteristic residency
time-scale in the stalling phase, namely the typical time-
scale the two BHs will spend at a separation of 10–100 pc.
In all these regimes, a stalled BH pair would arise when
the ﬁnal separation of the two BHs is too large for a bound
binary to form for a wide range of BH masses. Note that
a long characteristic residency time, for example signiﬁ-
25
Figure 12: Dual-activity time above a given projected separation
(1 kpc – squares – and 10 kpc – diamonds) divided by the activity
time above the same threshold, assuming a bolometric luminosity
threshold of 1043 erg s−1, for all the mergers in the suite of Capelo
et al. (2017). The merger number in the x-axis is the same as in
Tables 1–2 of Capelo et al. (2017). The colours refer to the initial
mass ratio: 1:1 – black, 1:2 – blue, 1:4 – cyan, 1:6 – green, and 1:10
– red. The horizontal lines show the observed fraction of dual AGN
systems out of interacting systems (in which at least one system has
an AGN) by Koss et al. (2012), for their full sample of Swift-BAT
AGN pairs (black, dot), their major pairs (blue, dash), and their
minor pairs (red, dash-dot) with projected separation 1–100 kpc.
Major mergers with 0.1 per cent BH feedback eﬃciency (squares of
Runs 01–06, and C4) should be compared to the blue, dashed line,
whereas minor mergers (squares of Runs 07–10) should be compared
to the red, dash-dotted line. Adapted from Capelo et al. (2017).
cantly longer than the orbital time, implies a higher prob-
ability to observe a dual AGN source, if both BHs are
accreting, and/or an oﬀset AGN, if only one is accreting.
(a) Ineﬃcient SMBH decay in minor mergers. If the
secondary galaxy is tidally disrupted far from the centre
of the primary, it can deliver a stalling BH at a few hun-
dred pc separations that will hardly decay eﬃciently af-
terwards (e.g. Callegari et al., 2009; Capelo et al., 2015).
The observability of dual AGN from tens of pc to >1 kpc
separations in major as well as minor mergers (down to
1:10 mass ratios) has been studied thoroughly in Capelo
et al. (2017). The general trend, at all separations, was
found to be that the dual activity time is much shorter in
1:10 mergers than in nearly equal mass mergers, by more
than an order of magnitude (see Fig. 12 and ﬁgures 6–7 of
the original paper). We note that, for separations above
1 kpc, the results of Capelo et al. (2017) are in agreement
with the observational ﬁndings of Koss et al. (2012), that
the fraction of dual AGN increases with decreasing separa-
tion and increasing mass ratio. Still, even at the smallest
separations considered (20–40 pc), not yet probed in ob-
servational samples, the dual activity time of 1:10 mergers
is always the smallest. The fraction of dual AGN in the
latter minor mergers is thus predicted to be down to a few
per cent relative to a single AGN sample. Whether this is
true also for even smaller separations and/or in the other
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Optical to IR SED of a 1:2 gas-rich merger in Blecha
et al. (2018), the ﬁrst time at which the separation between the two
BHs drops below 10 kpc (upper panel), and immediately after the
ﬁnal pairing of the two BHs (lower panel). The solid line refers to the
ﬁducial analysis, whereas the dotted line shows the SED obtained ne-
glecting the input from any AGN activity. The shaded areas indicate
the four WISE bands. Adapted from Blecha et al. (2018).
Figure 14: Time evolution of the same merger shown in Fig. 13 in
the WISE colour-colour space. The thick coloured line refers to the
ﬁducial analysis, whereas the thinner black line refers to the analy-
sis not including any AGN component. The circles, triangles, and
squares pinpoint the beginning of the run, the time of BH merger,
and the end of the run, respectively. The horizontal lines refer to the
commonly used thresholds for AGN selection (W1-W2 > 0.5 and
W1-W2 > 0.8). The gray dashed line refers to the two-colour se-
lection criterion proposed in Jarrett et al. (2011), whereas the blue
solid line indicates the selection criterion proposed by Blecha et al.
(2018). Adapted from Blecha et al. (2018).
regimes discussed here is yet to be explored.
When in-
terpreting the mapping between galaxy mass ratio in the
merger and BH mass ratio, we recall that, despite low dual
26
activity time, one BH can accrete proportionally more or
less than the other, depending on the initial mass ratio,
resulting in an increase (decrease) of the BH mass ratio in
minor (major) mergers (Capelo et al., 2015).
(b) Stochastic SMBH decay in clumpy galaxies. If the
BH pair is evolving in a clumpy galaxy such as the mas-
sive star-forming galaxies detected at z ∼1–3 (Förster
Schreiber et al., 2011; Tacconi et al., 2013; Wisnioski et al.,
2015), scattering from giant clouds/stellar clusters can
cause a random walk of the orbit of the BHs, leading to
stalling. Here the stalling of SMBHs can happen at sep-
arations as large as a kpc, but typically of the order of a
few hundred pc. Tamburello et al. (2017) considered the
decay of two massive BHs that are already embedded in
a gas-rich massive galactic disk subject to fragmentation
into massive star-forming clumps. They considered also
the eﬀect of BH accretion and feedback, as well as star
formation and feedback from supernova explosions. They
explored a large suite of simulations, with galactic hosts
having diﬀerent masses and gas fractions, and choosing
diﬀerent eccentricities for the orbit of the secondary BH
(the mass ratio of the two BHs was ﬁxed to 5:1, which
should be statistically representative, as the same mass
ratio is most typical for halo/galaxy mergers). The main
result is that the lighter BH, with mass in the range 107 to
4 × 107 M⊙, experiences repeated gravitational scattering
by the most massive clumps as well as by strong spiral den-
sity waves. This often results in its ejection from the disk
plane, slowing down its orbital decay by at least an order of
magnitude, as dynamical friction is suppressed in the low-
density envelope around the disk midplane. The suppres-
sion of orbital decay is exacerbated when AGN feedback
is included, as both dynamical friction and disk torques
are weaker even when the secondary BH is still in the disk
plane, due to local heating of the gaseous background. In
this case, since it sinks more slowly, the secondary can be
ejected when it is further away from the primary. The sec-
ondary, following an ejection, can still wander at separa-
tions larger than 1 kpc for Gyr time-scales. Without con-
sidering eventual subsequent dynamical perturbations, at
face value this would imply a complete abortion of the co-
alescence process. However, since Tamburello et al. (2017)
used galaxy models that lack an extended bulge/spheroid
component, dynamical friction was underestimated away
from the galactic disk plane. By computing analytically
the extra drag resulting from a Hernquist (1990) spheroid
with realistic structural parameters, it was found that, if
no more ejections occur, wandering secondaries should co-
alesce on time-scales of order 1 Gyr. This is still a very
long time-scale, comparable to, if not longer than, the typ-
ical merging time-scales of galaxies at z ∼2, opening the
possibility that triplets and their mutual dynamical inter-
actions (Bonetti et al., 2018) might be crucial to ascertain
the ﬁnal BH pair/binary state, and hence the predictions
for dual AGN activity.
(c) Ineﬃcient decay/pairing of IMBHs/MBHs in merg-
ing dwarf galaxies.
The number of candidate central
BHs in dwarf galaxies (e.g. Greene and Ho, 2004, 2007;
Reines et al., 2013; Moran et al., 2014; Lemons et al.,
2015; Baldassare et al., 2015) is increasing, owing to multi-
wavelength surveys such as the Chandra COSMOS Legacy
Survey (e.g. Mezcua et al., 2018). These candidates are
in the mass range 104–106 M⊙, hence bridging to the
mass window that is often referred to as intermediate-mass
BHs (IMBHs). The interest towards these lightweight cen-
tral BHs is motivated by the fact that, as pointed out in
Sect. 7.1, their mass is the ideal target mass for LISA
(Amaro-Seoane et al., 2017; Barack et al., 2019).
Here the eﬀect of the DM distribution is important,
at odds with more massive galactic hosts, because dwarf
galaxies are DM-dominated at nearly all radii. A novel nu-
merical study ﬁnds that the pairing of IMBHs in merging
dwarfs is aﬀected signiﬁcantly by the DM mass distribu-
tion inside the hosts, and can be rather ineﬃcient (Tamfal
et al., 2018). In the latter work, it appears that only in the
ideal case in which the DM proﬁle is a cuspy CDM pro-
ﬁle (e.g. Navarro et al., 1996) does the BH decay continue
unimpeded (until the resolution limit is reached; see Biava
et al. 2019 for an analytical study of the later stages of
the merger). Instead, when the DM density proﬁle is ﬂat-
ter, either because of the nature of the DM particle [e.g.,
self-interacting DM (SIDM) or fuzzy DM as opposed to
CDM], or because baryonic-feedback eﬀects alter the mass
distribution of both baryons and dark matter, dynamical
friction becomes very ineﬃcient already at ∼100 pc sep-
aration and results in stalling of the BH pairing process
before a bound binary can form.
Stalling at such sep-
aration is found to persist for several Gyr, although we
caution that the stalling and inspiral time-scales could be
aﬀected by the presence of gas, which was not included in
the collisionless simulations by Tamfal et al. (2018). Al-
beit with lower resolution, a statistical study of SMBH dy-
namics in galaxies with SIDM halos, assuming a large self-
interaction cross-section that produces kpc-scale constant
density cores, versus galaxies in CDM halos, has shown a
similar trend of BH pairing suppression (Di Cintio et al.,
2017).
Namely, most SMBHs end up wandering at few
hundred pc to few kpc separations in low-mass galaxies.
The dynamics of a sinking perturber, such as a BH bi-
nary, in a shallow/cored mass distribution is expected to
end up with stalling for two reasons: a lower density, and a
non-Maxwellian velocity distribution with many dark mat-
ter particles on N-horn periodic orbits (Cole et al., 2012;
Petts et al., 2015, 2016), the latter being orbits such that
lumps move faster than the BHs, accelerating them rather
than dragging them. A similar stalling result was shown
also in the cosmological zoom-in simulations presented in
Bellovary et al. (2019), in which about half of the massive
BHs in dwarf galaxies are found wandering within a few
kpc of the centre of the galaxy.
27
2.3. From kpc- to pc-scale separations: SMBH pairs in cir-
cumnuclear disks
As already discussed, there are very few observations of
SMBH pair candidates on 1–100 pc scale, e.g NGC 3393
(see Sect. 1.2.1; Fabbiano et al. 2011) or 0402+379 (see
Sect. 1.4 and Fig. 5). In Sect. 2.2.3, we have shown that,
while state-of-the-art galaxy merger simulations do pro-
vide a wealth of information on the dynamics of BH pairs
down to 10–100 pc separations, their resolution is not suf-
ﬁcient to capture the complex multi-phase structure of the
interstellar medium (ISM) on nuclear scales, and its eﬀect
on the evolution of SMBH pairs. In this sub-section, we
review physical processes that arise on these, intermediate
spatial scales and discuss how they aﬀect the rate of grav-
itational pairing of SMBHs, that occurs at separations of
∼1 pc.
The multi-phase ISM on these scales consists of cold
star-forming clouds and clumps embedded in a warm-hot
diﬀuse medium, spanning decades in density as well as in
temperature (see, e.g., Downes and Solomon 1998). The
hot medium is likely the result of powerful stellar and su-
pernova feedback, as many of these gas-rich nuclei host
starbursts or have features typical of post-starburst envi-
ronments. In particular, dense multi-phase CNDs of gas
and stars, with sizes of a few hundred to a few tens of pc,
dominate the mass distribution of resolved galactic nuclei
at low and intermediate redshift in merger remnants as
well as in the central regions of Seyfert galaxies (Medling
et al., 2014; Izumi et al., 2016), which are structurally typ-
ical late-type spiral galaxies. A common feature of these
CNDs in observations is that, while they show clear evi-
dence of rotation in their gas and stellar kinematics, the
velocity dispersion of both gas and stars is almost compa-
rable to rotation, akin to the high-redshift clumpy galax-
ies discussed in the previous section [paragraph (b)]. The
dense clumpy phase comprises a large fraction of the mass
in CNDs, while the diﬀuse phase dominates in terms of
volume, providing signiﬁcant pressure support (Downes &
Solomon 1998). The picture that emerges is that of a thick
turbulent rotationally supported CND, very diﬀerent from
the larger scale thin, kinematically cold disk that dom-
inates the mass distribution of late-type galaxies at kpc
scales. Since clouds and clumps of atomic and molecular
gas have masses of ∼103–106 M⊙and sizes of 1–10 pc,
an appropriate numerical hydrodynamical model requires
a mass resolution much higher than that in galaxy merg-
ers, and a spatial resolution of order pc or better. For this
reason, small-scale simulations that model speciﬁcally BH
pairs embedded in CNDs about a hundred pc in size have
been carried out by a number of authors.
The clumpiness of the ISM, due to the presence of cold
clouds, is an important factor for the late stage of BH
pair decay, at 10 pc separations and below, near the phase
in which a bound binary forms.
Fiacconi et al. (2013)
performed the ﬁrst study of BH pairs in clumpy CNDs,
documenting the dramatic eﬀect of gravitational scatter-
ing by clumps and spiral density waves that we already
illustrated for the case of clumpy high-redshift galaxies
in the previous section. They considered BHs right in the
LISA window (105–107 M⊙). They also found that in some
cases the decay can be accelerated due to the capture of
a massive gas cloud (of mass >106 M⊙) by the secondary.
They proposed the general notion that orbital decay is a
stochastic process in a clumpy CND, with orbital decay
time-scales down to ∼1 pc separations ranging from a few
Myr to as much as 100 Myr. The shortest time-scales agree
with previous results for smooth CNDs (see Escala et al.,
2005; Dotti et al., 2006, 2007; Mayer, 2013). Statistically,
though, a larger fraction of the simulations resulted in long
time-scales, in line with the same ﬁndings of Tamburello
et al. (2017), especially for BHs on eccentric orbits.
Early CND simulations were quite idealized, missing
feedback mechanisms which should play a major role in
CNDs, such as to generate the warm-hot diﬀuse phase,
as these are often hosting a starburst or at least elevated
star formation activity (Medling et al., 2015). del Valle
et al. (2015) and Souza Lima et al. (2017) recently carried
out similar studies but included a much richer inventory
of physical processes. del Valle et al. (2015) included star
formation and a weak form of supernova feedback, whereas
Souza Lima et al. (2017) employed a popular eﬀective sub-
grid model of supernova feedback, the blast-wave feedback
(Stinson et al., 2006), which has been shown to produce
galaxies with realistic structural properties in galaxy for-
mation simulations (Guedes et al., 2011; Munshi et al.,
2013; Tollet et al., 2016; Sokołowska et al., 2017). Souza
Lima et al. (2017) also added BH accretion and AGN feed-
back, using the same method implemented in Tamburello
et al. (2017), conﬁrming the stochastic orbital-decay pic-
ture and the prevalence of suppressed orbital decay with
time-scales in the range 50–100 Myr, whereas del Valle
et al. (2015) found the suppression of binary formation to
be a weaker eﬀect in their simulations. Diﬀerences in the
implementation of feedback, and the fact that the former
consider eccentric orbits while the latter explore mostly
circular orbits, might be at the origin of the discrepant
conclusions. Long binary-formation time-scales were also
found in a complementary multi-scale study modelling all
stages of the BH pair evolution in a realistic major galaxy
merger (Roškar et al., 2015).
The latter work also ad-
dressed the formation of the CND after the merger, but
was restricted to evolve only one initial condition for the
galaxy merger, due to the high computational burden in-
troduced.
Finally, Souza Lima et al. (2017) uncovered another pro-
cess that tends to suppress the BH decay and binary for-
mation, this time caused by AGN feedback; this is the
wake evacuation eﬀect, by which the secondary BH carves
a hole in the outer, lower-density region of the CND, as
it launches a hot pressurized bubble resulting from AGN
feedback. The result is that dynamical friction and disk
torques are suppressed as the CND–BH dynamical cou-
pling is temporarily stiﬂed by the presence of a large cavity.
Hence, the secondary BH decays more slowly even before a
28
strong interaction with a clump or spiral wave occurs, often
resulting in an ejection when it is still far from the center.
As a result, in the runs with both a clumpy ISM and AGN
feedback, the outcome is an even longer delay, of order of
1 Gyr (although we caution that diﬀerent implementations
of feedback could produce diﬀerent results and should be
investigated). The latter, however, should be regarded as
an upper limit in the absence of an extended massive stel-
lar spheroid (for the same argument, see Tamburello et al.
2017 in the case of high-redshift galactic disks).
When
dynamical friction by an extended spheroid (with realistic
parameters) is added, Souza Lima et al. (2017) obtained
a decay time-scale (to fraction of pc separation, namely
close to the resolution limit) of order a few 108 yr. This is
still almost two orders of magnitude longer than the decay
time-scale in a smooth CND with no feedback processes
included (see, e.g. Mayer, 2013). These eﬀects are only
some of those that are possible in a complex multi-phase
CND. For example, recently Park and Bogdanović (2017)
have shown that radiation pressure can also produce an ex-
tra drag pulling opposite to the dynamical friction wake,
which again slows down the orbital decay.
Part II
Gravitationally bound
SMBH binaries with
sub-parsec separations
As discussed in the previous section, the multi-wavelength
searches for SMBH systems with kpc separations, corre-
sponding to early stages of galactic mergers, have so far
successfully identiﬁed a number of multiple, dual and oﬀ-
set AGN. Gravitationally bound SMBHs (SMBH Binary,
SMBHBs) are representative of the later stages of galactic
mergers in which the two SMBHs (with separation ranging
from pc down to sub-pc scales) forms a Keplerian binary.
As we describe in the remainder of this section, the key
characteristic of gravitationally bound SMBHBs is that
they are observationally elusive. At the time of this writ-
ing a few hundred SMBHB candidates have been described
in the literature but their nature as true binaries is incon-
clusive and remains to be tested through continued multi-
wavelength monitoring. For this reason, most of what is
known about the formation, rate of evolution, physical
properties, and expected observational signatures associ-
ated with gravitationally bound binaries hinges on theo-
retical arguments.
In the remainder of this section, we
follow this line of argument and ﬁrst present expectations
based on theoretical models and simulations of SMBHBs
and then describe observational evidence for SMBHB can-
didates obtained with diﬀerent observational techniques.
3. Theoretical background
A gravitationally bound binary forms at the point when
the amount of gas and stars enclosed within its orbit be-
comes smaller than the total mass of the two black holes.
For a wide range of host properties and SMBH masses this
happens at orbital separations ≲10 pc (Mayer et al., 2007;
Dotti et al., 2007; Khan et al., 2012a). Begelman et al.
(1980) ﬁrst described the subsequent series of physical pro-
cesses that could remove energy and angular momentum
from an SMBHB and allow it to spiral in. In this picture,
after the SMBHB hardens, scattering events with stars in
the nucleus drive angular momentum loss and slowly bring
the SMBHB to separations of ∼1 pc. At separations of or-
der of 10−2 or 10−3 pc, GW emission becomes eﬃcient
and the binary evolves to coalescence in ≲a few×108 yrs.
The exact rate of binary orbital evolution depends on the
nature of gravitational interactions that it experiences and
is still an area of active research. In what follows, we dis-
cuss the most important mechanisms that lead to SMBHB
orbital evolution.
3.1. Interactions with stars and other SMBHs
It was not immediately clear whether SMBHB could
transit between stellar scattering events and eﬃcient emis-
sion of GWs within a Hubble Time. Three-body stellar
scattering requires a supply of stars within a certain re-
gion of phase space (the so-called loss-cone), which may
be depleted before the binary enters the GW-dominated
regime. This possible slow-down in the orbital evolution
of the parsec-scale SMBHBs, caused by ineﬃcient interac-
tions with stars (Milosavljević and Merritt, 2001), is of-
ten referred to as the last parsec problem. If the binary
evolution is not eﬃcient in this stage, a signiﬁcant frac-
tion of SMBHBs in the universe should reside at orbital
separations of ∼1 pc and would not yet be strong GW
emitters. However, the loss-cone may be replenished (Yu
et al., 2005), e.g., in galaxies with non-spherical poten-
tials.
Several theoretical studies report that the binary
evolution due to stellar scatterings continues unhindered to
much smaller scales, when the stellar distribution possesses
anisotropies (Yu, 2002; Merritt and Poon, 2004; Berczik
et al., 2006; Preto et al., 2011; Khan et al., 2011, 2012b,
2013; Vasiliev et al., 2014; Holley-Bockelmann and Khan,
2015; Vasiliev et al., 2015; Mirza et al., 2017).
In fact, mechanisms beyond three-body interactions
with stars may also play a critical role. For instance, if
stellar scattering were ineﬀective, and the binaries stalled,
then a third (or fourth, etc.) merger with another SMBH,
as a result of subsequent galaxy mergers, eventually tends
to promote merger for a fraction of such stalled bina-
ries (Volonteri et al., 2003; Hoﬀman and Loeb, 2007;
Bonetti et al., 2018; Ryu et al., 2018). More speciﬁcally,
a third SMBH “intruder” may end forming a hierarchical
triplet, i.e. a triple system where the hierarchy of orbital
separation deﬁnes an inner and an outer binary, the latter
29
consisting of the intruder and the centre of mass of the for-
mer. These systems may undergo Kozai-Lidov oscillations
if the intruder is on a highly inclined orbit with respect
to the inner binary (Blaes et al., 2002). These oscillations
increase the eccentricity of the inner binary accelerating
its orbital decay driven by GW emission, and eventually
driving it to coalescence. By performing rather extensive
analyses, including the SMBH merger sequence and the
dynamical evolution of triplets in a spherical galaxy po-
tential, Ryu et al. (2018) and Bonetti et al. (2018) ﬁnd
that a fraction of at least 20-30 percent of those SMB-
HBs that would otherwise stall are led to coalesce within
a characteristic timescale of 300 Myrs.
3.2. Interactions with gas
The existence of gas in the central regions of the post-
merger galaxy has also been proposed as a solution to the
ﬁnal parsec problem (Escala et al., 2005). The gas can not
only catalyze the binary evolution, but also provide bright
electromagnetic (EM) counterparts, signiﬁcantly enhanc-
ing the chances of detecting the binary from its EM spec-
trum (Armitage and Natarajan, 2002). Thus, SMBHBs in
predominantly gaseous environments are particularly in-
teresting for this review and, in particular, for the binary
signatures discussed below. The interaction of a binary
with a circumbinary disk has been the topic of a num-
ber of theoretical studies (see e.g. Armitage and Natara-
jan, 2005; MacFadyen and Milosavljević, 2008; Bogdanović
et al., 2008; Cuadra et al., 2009a; Haiman et al., 2009;
Hayasaki, 2009; Bogdanović et al., 2011; Roedig et al.,
2012; Shi et al., 2012; Noble et al., 2012; Kocsis et al.,
2012a,b; D’Orazio et al., 2013; Farris et al., 2014; Raﬁkov,
2016; Bowen et al., 2018, 2019, for recent investigations).
The phenomenology has been found to depend on the black
hole mass ratio q ≡M2/M1 and can be broadly divided in
three mass ratio regimes: I) q ≪1, II) 10−4 ∼< q ∼< 0.05,
and III) 0.1 ∼< q ≤1.
• In the limit of small mass ratio (q ≪1), signiﬁcant
work has been done to understand the linear inter-
actions between the binary and the disk.
This so-
called Type I planetary migration is facilitated by
linear spiral density waves launched at resonant disk
locations (e.g. Goldreich and Tremaine, 1980). The
rate and even the direction (inward or outward) of
Type I migration is sensitive to thermodynamics (e.g.
Paardekooper and Mellema, 2006).
• The second regime (10−4 ∼< q ∼< 0.05) has also been
widely explored. The secondary opens a narrow an-
nular gap in the disk, resulting in so-called Type II
migration (e.g. Ward, 1997). The interaction is non-
linear, generally causing inward migration on a time-
scale comparable to the viscous time-scale of the disk8
8The time scale on which the angular momentum is transported
outward through the disk.
near the binary (e.g. Lin and Papaloizou, 1986). De-
viations from this time-scale, however, can be signiﬁ-
cant, especially when the mass of the smaller BH ex-
ceeds that of the nearby disk, so that the disk cannot
absorb the secondary’s angular momentum, causing
the migration to slow down (e.g. Syer and Clarke,
1995; Ivanov et al., 1999). Additionally, contrary to
the simplistic view in which the secondary divides the
disk into an inner and outer region and becomes, eﬀec-
tively, a particle accreting in lock-step with the back-
ground gas (e.g. Armitage, 2007), the gas has been
shown to be able to ﬂow across the gap on horsehoe
orbits (e.g. Duﬀell et al., 2014; Dürmann and Kley,
2017).
• The range of 0.1 ∼< q ≤1 is numerically much more
challenging because both black holes as well as the
origin need to be on the coordinate grid, and the
gas ﬂows become much more violently disturbed by
the binary.
In this range, however, relatively little
analogous work has been done regarding the rate and
the direction of migration. There are several simula-
tions in the literature of q ∼1 binaries, including the
compact GRMHD regime near merger. For example,
Bowen et al. (2018, 2019) simulated the full 3D GR
magnetized mini-disks coupled to circumbinary accre-
tion in a SMBHB approaching merger, and character-
ized the gas dynamics in this regime. However, the
impact of gas on the binary orbit is not evaluated (and
is likely insigniﬁcant at this late GW-driven stage).
MacFadyen and Milosavljević (2008), D’Orazio et al.
(2013) and Miranda et al. (2017) used 2D grid-based
hydrodynamical simulations to study SMBHBs em-
bedded in thin α disks (Shakura and Sunyaev, 1973).
However, these simulations excluded the innermost
region surrounding the binary, by imposing an inner
boundary condition, neglecting potentially important
gas dynamics and torque contributions from inside the
excised region. Farris et al. (2014), on the other hand,
included the innermost region in their simulated do-
main, but their study did not focus on the binary-disk
interaction, and did not present measurements of the
gas torques from that region. Studies by Cuadra et al.
(2009b) and Roedig et al. (2012) followed the inter-
action between SMBHBs with q = 1/3 and a self-
gravitating circumbinary disk, using 3D SPH simula-
tion, and generally found gas disk torques to be strong
enough to drive a sub-pc binary into the GW-driven
regime in a Hubble time (except perhaps the most
massive systems).
However, recent work (Tang et al., 2017; Muñoz et al.,
2019; Moody et al., 2019) has called this conclusion
into question, because in the quasi-steady state and
the much higher spatial resolutions reached in these
works, the torques appear dominated by gas very close
to the individual BHs, and cause outward, rather than
inward-migration (see discussion presented below in
30
this section Open Questions related to theory of SMB-
HBs with subparsec separations.
The 0.1 ∼< q ≤1 regime is of particular interest to SMB-
HBs, as such systems may be naturally favored by the
binary formation process (see Sect. 2.2.3) and could re-
sult in two AGN of comparable luminosity and the loud-
est GW sources. Fig. 15 illustrates the geometry of the
circumbinary region for SMBHBs in this mass ratio range.
Hydrodynamic simulations of prograde binaries (rotating
in the same sense as the circumbinary disk) indicate that
in unequal mass binaries, the binary expels the gas from
the central region, creating a low-density cavity.
Addi-
tionally, accretion occurs preferentially onto the smaller
of the two SMBHs, which orbits closer to the inner edge
of the circumbinary disk (Artymowicz and Lubow, 1994;
Günther and Kley, 2002; Hayasaki et al., 2007a; Roedig
et al., 2011; Farris et al., 2014). The proximity to the cir-
cumbinary disk and a smaller velocity relative to it (when
compared to the primary SMBH) allow the secondary to
capture more gas and result in a higher accretion rate.
This phenomenon of “accretion inversion” is of practical
interest because it implies that the AGN powered by the
lower mass SMBH may appear more luminous than the
primary counterpart.
As the binary orbit decays, the inner rim of the cir-
cumbinary disk follows it inward until the timescale for
orbital decay by gravitational radiation becomes shorter
than the viscous timescale of the disk (Armitage and
Natarajan, 2005). At that point, the rapid loss of orbital
energy and angular momentum through gravitational radi-
ation can cause the binary to detach from the circumbinary
disk and to accelerate towards coalescence; this phase is
known as “decoupling”. The evolution diﬀers for retrograde
binaries, which due to the cancellation or orbital angular
momentum do not open a low density cavity in the disk,
and for the same reason tend to shrink faster (Roedig and
Sesana, 2014).
3.3. Open questions related to theory of SMBHBs with sub-
parsec separations
Thermodynamic properties of the circumbinary disk
(which deﬁne the viscous time-scale) are also expected to
play an important role in the binary evolution.
These
are uncertain, since they are still prohibitively computa-
tionally expensive to model from ﬁrst principles and are
not constrained by observations.
More speciﬁcally, the
thermodynamics of the disk is determined by the binary
dynamics as well as the presence of magnetic ﬁeld and
radiative heating/cooling of the gas.
While the role of
magnetic ﬁelds in circumbinary disks has been explored
in some simulations (Giacomazzo et al., 2012; Shi et al.,
2012; Noble et al., 2012; Farris et al., 2012; Gold et al.,
2014; Kelly et al., 2017), a fully consistent calculation of
radiative processes is still beyond computational reach.
On top of this, signiﬁcant uncertainties related to the
SMBHB orbital evolution timescales still remain. In par-
ticular, a recent study which resolved the minidisks and
gas ﬂows around the individual BHs at much higher res-
olution (Tang et al., 2017) found that the torques are
even stronger and are dominated by the gas very close to
the BHs (near or even inside their tidal truncation radii,
RH ≈0.3q1/3a, where q is the mass ratio and a is the
semi-major axis of the binary; gas can formally be bound
to individual BHs inside this radius).
The net torque arises from a small asymmetry in the
shape of the gas distribution near the edges of the mini-
disks ahead and behind the BHs. Tang et al. (2017) found
that for a disk density corresponding to an accretion rate
normalized to 0.3 times the Eddington value, the binary in-
spiral time is ≈3×106 years, independent of BH mass and
binary separation. However, given the dependence of this
result on the small asymmetry in the gas distribution near
the BHs, one has to keep in mind that 3D eﬀects, radiation
pressure, winds, etc. are likely to modify this timescale sig-
niﬁcantly. Likewise, apart from additional physical eﬀects,
the subtlety of the torques also make them susceptible to
numerical issues. For example, Tang et al. (2017) found
that the numerical sink speed aﬀects the torques, and the
torques turn positive (causing outspiral) for rapid sinks.
Muñoz et al. (2019) found a positive torque with a simi-
lar setup, resulting in widening, rather than shrinking of
the SMBHB orbit. Recent work by Moody et al. (2019)
has also found positive torques, even with an apparently
slower sink prescription.
The next generation of simulations involving circumbi-
nary disks must be improved, also adding the eﬀect of ra-
diation and feedback and increasing the number of orbits
considered for the evolution of the system. In addition, a
more realistic cosmological setting may provide more phys-
ically motivated conditions for these (so far local) simula-
tions and help to put them in a broader context of a galaxy
merger (see Sect. 2.1). Similarly, the simulations of binary-
stellar interactions should be also improved, expanding to
realistic timescales and galactic environments.
Observations of the orbital properties of SMBHBs are
key to constraining and understanding binary evolution.
This is because the frequency of binaries as a function
of their orbital separation is directly related to the rate
at which binaries evolve towards coalescence. Theoretical
models predict that the exchange of angular momentum
with the ambient medium is likely to result in SMBHB
orbits with eccentricities ∼> 0.1, with the exact value de-
pending on whether gravitationally bound SMBHs evolve
in mostly stellar or gas-rich environments (Roedig et al.,
2011; Sesana et al., 2011b; Holley-Bockelmann and Khan,
2015). Known semi-major axes and eccentricity distribu-
tions would therefore provide a direct test for a large body
of theoretical models.
The key characteristic of gravitationally bound SMB-
HBs is that they are observationally elusive and expected
to be intrinsically rare. While the frequency of binaries is
uncertain and dependent on their unknown rate of evolu-
tion on small scales (see Sect. 2.1), theorists estimate that
31
Figure 15: Illustration of the geometry of circumbinary region after the binary has created a low density region in the disk. Left: Simulations
indicate that SMBHBs in this evolutionary phase can accrete by capturing gas from the inner rim of the circumbinary disk and can maintain
mini-disks bound to individual holes. Adapted from Bogdanović (2015). Right: Snapshot of gas surface density from a 2D hydrodynamic
simulation of a circumbinary disk around an SMBHB with mass ratio 1:4. Orbital motion is in the counterclockwise direction. Superposed
green arrows trace the ﬂuid velocity. Adapted from Farris et al. (2014).
a fraction < 10−3 of AGN at redshift z < 0.7 may host
detectable SMBHBs (Volonteri et al., 2009). Similar frac-
tions have been found with diﬀerent approaches (Sesana
et al., 2012a; Kelley et al., 2019b; Krolik et al., 2019) This
result has two important implications: (a) any observa-
tional search for SMBHBs must involve a large sample of
AGN, making the archival data from large surveys of AGN
an attractive starting point and (b) the observational tech-
nique used in the search must be able to distinguish sig-
natures of binaries from those of AGN powered by single
SMBHs.
4. Observational evidence for SMBH binaries with
sub-parsec separations.
Observational techniques used to search for SMBHBs
systems have so far largely relied on direct imaging,
photometry, and spectroscopic measurements (see Bog-
danović, 2015; Komossa and Zensus, 2016, for a review).
They have recently been complemented by observations
with PTAs.
We summarize the outcomes of these dif-
ferent observational approaches in this section and note
that in all cases SMBHBs have been challenging to iden-
tify because of their small angular separation on the sky
(spatially unresolved in most cases), as well as the un-
certainties related to the uniqueness of their observational
signatures.
4.1. Radio imaging searches for SMBHBs with the VLBI
As described in Sect. 1.4, radio-emitting binaries can be
imaged to redshift z ∼0.1 on pc scale with VLBI, and 10-
pc scale separations are resolvable practically at any red-
shift. We have already mentioned the well-known example
of an SMBHB system with pc-separation, discovered and
studied with VLBI in the nearby radio galaxy 0402+379
(see Fig. 5, Rodriguez et al. 2006). Recently, Kharb et al.
(2017) reported on a sub-pc separation candidate binary
system in the Seyfert galaxy NGC 7674 (z = 0.0289).
Since the assumed two cores were only detected at a single
frequency, the radio spectral indices that would provide
the strongest proof of their optically thick nature, could
not be derived.
It
is
worth
mentioning
again
that
low-
resolution
data
should
be
taken
with
care.
For
example,
SDSS J113126.08−020459.2
and
SDSS J110851.04+065901.4, two double-peaked [O III]
emitting AGN (see Sect. 1.1) identiﬁed as candidate kpc-
scale pairs AGN using optical and near-IR observations
(Liu et al., 2010b,a), were observed with the European
VLBI Network. Those observations yielded a detection of
only one AGN in the source SDSS J113126.08−020459.2,
and none in the case of SDSS J110851.04+065901.4
(Bondi et al., 2016).
Another interesting example is
J1536+0441 which was originally proposed as a tight
(∼
0.1 pc separation) binary SMBH by interpreting
its unusual optical emission line systems (Boroson and
Lauer, 2009).
Soon after, radio observations with the
VLA instead found two components separated by 5.1 kpc
(Wrobel and Laor, 2009) whose compact AGN nature
was proven by high-resolution VLBI imaging (Bondi and
Pérez-Torres, 2010).
Burke-Spolaor (2011) systematically analysed archival
multi-frequency VLBI data available for the most lumi-
nous radio AGN known – more than 3000 objects – and
found only a single case with double ﬂat-spectrum cores.
This previously known object, the nearby radio galaxy
0402+379 (z = 0.055), has two nuclei separated by just
7.3 pc (see Fig. 5, Rodriguez et al. 2006).
The superior angular resolution is not the only bene-
ﬁt radio interferometric observations oﬀer for studying bi-
nary AGN. The presence of a binary companion can be
imprinted on the the symmetric pair of relativistic jets
emanating from the vicinity of one of the SMBHs. In this
model, the SMBH that is producing the jet has periodi-
cally changing velocity (due to the orbital motion in the
binary) which may lead to an observable modulation on an
32
otherwise straight jet (e.g. Gower et al., 1982; Kaastra and
Roos, 1992; Roos et al., 1993; Hardee et al., 1994). Such
periodic perturbations may result in rotationally symmet-
ric helical S-shaped radio structures (e.g. Begelman et al.,
1980; Roos, 1988; Lobanov and Roland, 2005; Kun et al.,
2014; Deane et al., 2014).
The presence of precessing jets does however does not
necessarily indicate modulation caused by binary SMBHs.
For example, precessing jets can also form due to tilted ac-
cretion disks in single AGN (Liska et al., 2018). Internal
plasma instabilities in the jet, or the interaction of a jet
with the ambient medium could also produce “wiggling”
jets. Therefore semi-periodic patterns in radio jets alone
cannot be considered a deﬁnitive observational evidence
of SMBHBs. However, in cases where multiple indications
are available, the precessing jet model could constrain the
SMBH masses, separation and orbital period. Jet studies
are often invoked for tight binary candidates that are radio
sources but not directly resolvable with interferometers, to
seek indirect supportive evidence for binarity (Kun et al.,
2015; Mohan et al., 2016; Mooley et al., 2018). These tar-
gets are selected e.g., on the basis of their periodic optical
variability; this will be discussed in detail in Sect. 4.3.
From SMBHB candidates separated well below the reso-
lution limits of radio interferometers, an extensively stud-
ied example is the blazar OJ 287. Its quasi-periodic optical
light curve shows double peaks about every 12 yr (Sillan-
paa et al., 1988); see also the recent review by Dey et al.
(2019). These variations have been explained in the con-
text of a number of diﬀerent binary SMBH scenarios. The
best-explored of these requires an SMBHB on an eccentric
orbit with a semi-major axis of about 0.05 pc (Valtonen,
2007) crossing the accretion disk of the primary (Valtonen
et al., 2008) twice during each orbit.
However, connecting the radio morphology to the de-
tected periodicities in the optical light curve is not
straightforward.
The complex VLBI jet of OJ 287 has
been described with a helical model (Valtonen and Piha-
joki, 2013) in a way that is consistent with the binary
orbital motion. Most recently, Britzen et al. (2018) pre-
sented an extensive study of the jet emission of OJ 287
at cm wavelengths, combining VLBI and single-dish ra-
dio data, and found that precession of an accretion disk
around a single SMBH can explain the observed periodic
behaviour of the jet morphology and radio ﬂux density
changes (but not the optical long-term lightcurve and po-
larimetry; Dey et al. 2019). A binary is still likely needed
in that model for explaining the disk precession itself.
In addition, Agudo et al. (2012), who studied the jet
at higher resolution at mm wavelengths, detected erratic,
wobbling movement of the jet. It was explained by variable
accretion leading to ﬂuctuating plasma injection to the jet.
The most recent modelling of OJ 287 in the context of the
SMBHB model of Valtonen and collaborators is based on
4.5 order post-Newtonian dynamics. It requires a binary
of mass ratio q ≃0.01, a massive primary of 1.8×1010M⊙,
and an eccentric orbit of the secondary with ϵ = 0.7 (re-
view by Dey et al. 2019). The orbit is subject to General
Relativity (GR) precession of the pericenter of ∆φ = 39
deg/orbit.
Independent supporting evidence for a large
mass of the primary SMBH comes from optical imaging
and scaling arguments (Wright et al., 1998; Valtonen et al.,
2012).
Another remarkable example is the BL Lac object
PG 1553+113 at z=0.5, extensively monitored in radio,
which shows evidence of a possible quasi-periodic trend
in gamma-ray emission (at energies above 100 GeV), with
main peaks occurring over a period of 2.18 years (observer
frame, corresponding to 1.5 year in the source frame) and
strengthened by correlated oscillations observed in radio
and optical ﬂuxes (Ackermann et al., 2015; Tavani et al.,
2018). The periodicity has been interpreted as an SMB-
HBs system with a total mass of ∼108 M⊙and a millipar-
sec separation. Jet nutation from the misalignment of the
rotation SMBH spins or Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)-
kinetic tearing instabilities in the jet of the more massive
BH due to the stress of the smaller BH at the periastron
could be the source of the periodicity (see Tavani et al.
2018; Cavaliere et al. 2017, and references therein).
On larger scales, far away from the central engine, the
jets/lobes may provide indications of past merging events.
X-shaped (or winged) radio sources are radio galaxies
where, besides the usual pair of lobes, a second pair of low-
surface brightness radio-emitting wings can be detected
(Leahy and Parma, 1992). Merritt and Ekers (2002) pro-
posed that a rapid change in the direction of the BH spin
(spin-ﬂip) in a merger event can lead to the formation of
these structures. Roberts et al. (2015b) used the existing
data on X-shaped radio galaxies to estimate the GW back-
ground. They found that most sources in the sample are
likely not associated with spin axis ﬂips but the X-shaped
structures are rather due to backﬂows or axis drifts. The
number of genuine X-shaped radio sources is at most ∼20
per cent (Roberts et al., 2015a) of the initial sample of
candidates selected by Cheung (2007), and only a fraction
of these could be caused by merger-induced spin ﬂips (see
also Liu et al. 2003 for theoretical considerations).
The inferred rate for major galaxy mergers results in
SMBH coalescence is much lower in comparison, and less
than 0.13 per Gyr per radio galaxy host. This suggests
that most of X-shaped radio sources cannot be produced as
a consequence of SMBHB mergers. Recently, Saripalli and
Roberts (2018) presented a detailed morphological study of
more than 80 X-shaped radio galaxies. The data suggest
that phenomena related to the central SMBH spin axis
cause most of the morphologies seen. While binary black
holes are a strong contender in causing axis changes, other
(disk-related) explanations are not excluded.
4.2. Spectroscopic searches for SMBHBs
4.2.1. Broad emission-line velocity shifts as signatures of
sub-pc SMBHBs
Another approach to searching for SMBHBs is to make
analogy to spectroscopic binary stars (Komberg, 1968;
33
Begelman et al., 1980) and look for the radial velocity
signature of orbital motion in the emission lines of AGN
and quasars (Gaskell, 1983). This scenario corresponds to
a physical picture where one or both of the SMBHs is ac-
tive (e.g., Hayasaki et al., 2007b; Cuadra et al., 2009b, as
described in Sect. 3), but their broad-line regions (BLRs)
are distinct and suﬀer at most mild truncation due to their
membership in the binary (however, see the next para-
graph for a detailed discussion of the eﬀect of BLR trun-
cation).
This can occur at a limited range in SMBHB separa-
tion. At close separations comparable to or smaller than
the BLR size, the BLRs become substantially truncated
(Roedig et al., 2014; Runnoe et al., 2015) and eventu-
ally merge (Krolik et al., 2019). At wide separations, the
broad-line velocity oﬀset or acceleration due to orbital mo-
tion will be imperceptible (e.g., Eracleous et al., 2012; Shen
and Loeb, 2010; Popović, 2012, and see discussion below).
Thus, the assumption is that the BLR is not dissimi-
lar to that of a normal AGN: it is a ﬂattened distribu-
tion of clouds originating in the outer parts of the accre-
tion disk, at ∼103 rg (rg = GM/c2 and M is the SMBH
mass), gravitationally bound to its SMBH with a predom-
inantly Keplerian velocity ﬁeld (e.g., Wills and Browne,
1986; Koratkar and Gaskell, 1991; Peterson and Wandel,
2000; Denney et al., 2010; Grier et al., 2013). A disk-like
emission-line proﬁles are seen in AGN at lower luminosity,
while in Seyfert 1 galaxies an additional narrower compo-
nent (FWHM ∼1000−2000 km s−1) is observed, probably
due to a non disk BLR gas, usually moving at lower ve-
locities (Storchi-Bergmann et al., 2017). The hypothesis
is then that bulk orbital motion of the SMBH and BLR is
observable as a time-dependent velocity shift in the broad
lines of some AGN relative to the narrow emission lines
that are emitted from larger size scales in the host galaxy.
There are limits on the type and properties of SMBHBs
likely to be uncovered by spectroscopic searches. Pﬂueger
et al. (2018) studied this question using an analytic model
to determine the likelihood for detection of SMBHBs by
ongoing spectroscopic surveys. The model combines the
parameterized rate of orbital evolution of SMBHBs in cir-
cumbinary disks with the selection eﬀects of spectroscopic
surveys and returns a multivariate likelihood for SMBHB
detection. Based on this model, they ﬁnd that spectro-
scopic searches with yearly cadences of observations are in
principle sensitive to binaries with orbital separations less
than a few × 104 rg (where rg is now deﬁned in terms of
the binary mass), and for every one SMBHB in this range,
there should be over 200 more gravitationally bound sys-
tems with similar properties, at larger separations. Fur-
thermore, if spectra of all SMBHBs in this separation
range exhibit the AGN-like emission lines utilized by spec-
troscopic searches, the projection factors imply ﬁve unde-
tected binaries for each observed 108 M⊙SMBHB with
mass ratio 0.3 and orbital separation 104 rg (and more if
some fraction of SMBHBs is inactive). Assuming a binary
mass of 107 −108 M⊙, these orbital separations translate
to ∼0.01−0.1 pc and orbital periods of order a few tens of
years to few centuries. Notably, observational monitoring
campaigns cannot hope to observe many cycles of radial
velocity curves from such systems, so the signature of a
binary will rather be a monotonic increase or decrease in
the observed velocity of an emission line.
Velocity shifts in double-peaked emitters. In the physical
model of an SMBHB embedded in a gaseous disk, either
one or both SMBHs can be active. Quasars with double-
peaked broad emission lines (Eracleous and Halpern, 1994;
Eracleous et al., 2009) have been hypothesized as the ob-
servational consequence of the latter scenario (Gaskell,
1983, 1984, 1988; Popović, 2012); see Fig. 16. This hy-
pothesis has been tested and is no longer favored based on
a number of theoretical and observational results. First,
the velocity separated peaks observed in the broad lines
of these systems are not considered to be the signature of
an SMBHB (Chen et al., 1989). From Kepler’s laws, the
orbital velocity should not exceed the dispersion of the
gas around a single BH (e.g., Eracleous et al., 1997), so
velocity splitting of the line proﬁle is seen in only a very
small fraction of orbital conﬁgurations (Shen and Loeb,
2010). Second, reverberation mapping campaigns for in-
dividual double-peaked emitters (e.g., 3C 390.3, Dietrich
et al., 1998; O’Brien et al., 1998) show that both shoul-
ders of the broad line respond to changes in the photoion-
izing continuum at the same time. Such a straightforward
response is not expected for a system with two central
sources and two BLRs. Finally, the long-term radial ve-
locity curves of the broad lines are inconsistent with the
SMBHB hypothesis (e.g., see Fig. 17 taken from Eracleous
et al. 1997 and see also Gezari et al. 2007; Lewis et al. 2010;
Liu et al. 2016a).
Although double-peaked broad lines are now thought to
originate in the outer regions of the BLR disk (e.g., Era-
cleous and Halpern, 1994; Storchi-Bergmann et al., 2017),
the body of work testing the SMBHB hypothesis for this
class of objects raises important points relevant for ongo-
ing searches. First, quasar variability can mimic the signal
of an SMBHB on many timescales (Eracleous et al., 1997;
Halpern and Eracleous, 2000). Thus, additional work in
the area of time-domain spectroscopy of AGN is needed
to identify unique signatures of orbital motion in an AGN.
Second, in the interest of testing the nature of binary can-
didates, the exercise of ruling out a class of objects may
be possible sooner than conﬁrming a binary. As an exam-
ple, Eracleous et al. (1997) and, more recently, Liu et al.
(2016a) have demonstrated for many double-peaked emit-
ters that unphysically large black hole masses are required
to explain the radial velocity curves in the context of the
SMBHB hypothesis. Finally, as already pointed out for
double-peaked NLR emission lines (see Sect. 1.1.1), also in
this case it should be noted that the gas may be character-
ized by complex kinematics (i.e., inﬂows and outﬂows pow-
ered by AGN and/or star formation activity) that could
produce the observed double-peaked proﬁles without nec-
essarily requiring the presence of a pair of nuclei.
34
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
450
455
460
465
470
475
480
Intensity
Wavelength
Ph=0.80
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
470
475
480
485
490
495
500
Intensity
Wavelength
Figure 16: Left panel: Hβ emission-line proﬁle emitted from the SMBHB system when both black holes have the BLR, while in the inset
the line proﬁle when only one component has the BLR is shown. Adapted from Popović (2012). Right panel: Hα emission line (once the
continuum spectrum is removed; solid black line) ﬁtted by the disk model (solid green line). There are additionally two relatively broad peaks,
reproduced using two Gaussian proﬁles (blue and red line), while the cyan dash-dotted line is the Gaussian ﬁt to the narrow Hα component.
The black dash-dotted lines are the Gaussian ﬁts to [NII]λ6548, 6583 lines, with ﬁxed FWHM given by ﬁtting [OIII] λ4959, 5007. The dashed
green line shows the disk model line with outer radius 8000 rg, and the same inner radius and inclination as the best-ﬁt solid green line. The
black solid line in the lower panel shows the residuals. From Tang and Grindlay (2009).
Figure 17: The radial velocity curve for one shoulder of the broad Hα
emission line in the double-peaked emitter 3C 390.3. This family of
AGN was considered as the observational consequence of an SMBHB
embedded in a gaseous disk with both black holes active and having
distinct BLRs. The dashed line shows the expected behavior of the
velocity oﬀset of the peak in this scenario based on the data prior to
1988. As described in Sect. 4.2.1, this is one among several lines of
reasoning used to disfavor the SMBHB hypothesis for double-peaked
emitters.
Filled and open points diﬀerentiate between error bars
calculated using error in the mean and rms dispersion, respectively.
Adapted from Eracleous et al. (1997).
Velocity shifts in single-peaked emitters. The “single-line
spectroscopic binary” case is still a viable avenue to search
for SMBHBs among AGN with single-peaked broad emis-
sion lines.
The ﬁrst candidate SMBHBs were identiﬁed
based on their velocity-oﬀset broad emission line proﬁles
in single-epoch spectra, starting with 3C 227 and 3C 668
(Gaskell, 1983, 1984). Time-domain spectroscopic follow-
up can then reveal the signal of orbital motion in the ve-
locity shift of broad emission lines between two or more
epochs of observation. Recent investigations adopting this
approach have monitored both AGN with velocity oﬀset
lines and also apparently normal AGN with broad lines
located at their systemic velocity, corresponding to SMB-
HBs viewed in conjunction.
There are of order 102 SMBHB candidates identiﬁed
via velocity oﬀsets between broad Hβ (see, e.g., Fig. 18)
and the host galaxy redshift that have been selected
from SDSS quasar catalogs (Tsalmantza et al., 2011; Er-
acleous et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2014b).
Spectroscopic
monitoring of these candidates has been used to mea-
sure or limit subsequent shifts of the broad lines (De-
carli et al., 2013) and place limits on the properties of
the candidates (Liu et al., 2014b; Runnoe et al., 2015;
Guo et al., 2019).
Runnoe et al. (2017) presented ra-
dial velocity curves for the Eracleous et al. (2012) can-
didates probing timescales up to 12 years in the rest frame
with 3–4 spectra per object.
They identiﬁed 3 candi-
dates (SDSS J093844.45+005715.7, J095036.75+512838.1,
J161911.24+501109.2) for sub-parsec separation SMBHBs
which show the monotonic changes in their radial velocity
curves (Fig. 19) that are expected for SMBHBs with peri-
ods of decades to hundreds of years. They also adapt the
methodology developed for the double peaked emitters of
placing limits on the masses and separations of the hypo-
thetical SMBHBs, but the limits they obtained were not
yet restrictive.
Searches for SMBHBs among regular AGN (i.e. corre-
sponding to SMBHBs seen in conjunction) have been con-
ducted based on Mg ii λ2798 (Ju et al., 2013; Wang et al.,
2017) and Hβ (Shen et al., 2013). Using the distribution of
observed accelerations measured for the 521 AGN in SDSS
DR7 with multiple quality spectra and z < 0.9, Shen et al.
(2013) placed limits on the properties of SMBHBs among
the quasar population. If the accelerations are attributable
entirely to SMBHBs, they infer that most of the quasars
in their sample must be in binaries, the inactive black hole
must usually be more massive, and that the separation is
35
Figure 18: SMBHB candidates identiﬁed through optical Hβ oﬀset. Left panel: these candidates were selected on the basis of the presence
of broad Hβ emission lines that are velocity shifted relative to the narrow [O iii] λλ4959, 5007 emission lines. The dashed line marks the rest
wavelength of Hβ, and the dotted lines mark ±5, 000 and 10,000 km s−1 relative to the dashed line. Thus, the broad Hβ peaks are oﬀset by
a few ×1000 km s−1. This may be the observational consequence of a scenario where one of the BHs in a SMBHB is active and its orbital
motion induces a periodic radial velocity shift in the broad Hβ emission line relative to the narrow lines in the spectrum. Such a system
would likely have a sub-pc separation corresponding to a period of the order of decades to hundreds years. Adapted from Eracleous et al.
(2012). Right Panel: example of the cross-correlation analysis applied to measure the velocity shift of the broad Hβ between two epochs.
The broad Hβ in the SDSS spectrum is shown in black, while the follow-up observation is in red. The spectral range of the cross-correlation
analysis is marked by the dotted vertical lines. Negative values of the cross-correlation analysis mean that the emission line in the follow-up
spectrum needs to be blue-shifted to match the SDSS spectrum. From Liu et al. (2014b).
at most a few times the radius of the BLR (which they
estimate to be 0.01 −0.1 pc using the radius-luminosity
relationship, e.g., Bentz et al., 2009).
Motivated by the described advances in observational
searches for sub-parsec SMBHBs, Nguyen and Bogdanović
(2016) have developed a semi-analytic model to describe
spectral emission-line signatures of these systems. Based
on this study, they ﬁnd that the modeled proﬁles show dis-
tinct statistical properties as a function of the semimajor
axis, mass ratio, eccentricity of the binary, and the de-
gree of alignment of the triple disk system (including two
mini-disks and a circumbinary disk). This suggests that
the broad emission-line proﬁles from SMBHB systems can
in principle be used to infer the distribution of these pa-
rameters and as such merit further investigation. Nguyen
et al. (2019a,b) also ﬁnd that their modeled proﬁle shapes
are more compatible with the observed sample of SMBHB
candidates (drawn from the observations reported in Er-
acleous et al., 2012; Runnoe et al., 2015, 2017) than with
their control sample of regular AGN. Furthermore, they
report that if the observed sample of SMBHBs is made
up of genuine binaries, it must include compact systems
(with orbital separations log(a/M) ≈4.20 ± 0.42) with
comparable masses and misaligned mini-disks. If the con-
sidered SMBHB candidates are true binaries, this result
would suggest that there is a physical process that allows
initially unequal mass systems to evolve toward compara-
ble mass ratios or point to some, yet unspeciﬁed, selection
bias. Similarly, if upheld for conﬁrmed SMBHBs, this ﬁnd-
ing would indicate the presence of a physical mechanism
that maintains misalignment of the mini-disks (or causes
them to be warped) down to sub-parsec binary separa-
tions.
However, if the Hβ velocity shifts are the result of
long-term quasar variability, then close, massive binaries
are disfavored. Regular quasar spectral variability is the
source of the biggest caveat to ﬁnding SMBHBs via this
approach. On short timescales of months, normal quasars
can produce velocity shifts comparable to what is seen
in SMBHB candidate samples (Barth et al., 2015). The
long-term spectroscopic variability of regular quasars has
not been well characterized, therefore this remains a criti-
cal uncertainty for ﬁnding SMBHBs with the radial veloc-
ity technique. The baseline measurement of the spectro-
scopic variability for a control sample of regular AGN on
long timescales is the promise of archival data and upcom-
ing spectroscopic surveys (see Sect. 6.1). Because regular
quasar variability can easily masquerade as the signal of
orbital motion on timescales much shorter than the orbital
period which is expected to be long, it is extremely impor-
tant to conduct as many supporting tests as possible.
4.2.2. Peculiar broad emission-line ratios as signatures of
sub-pc SMBHBs
Close SMBHBs (with a semimajor axis ∼< 0.1 pc) have
also been proposed to signiﬁcantly alter the luminosity ra-
tios between diﬀerent pairs of broad emission lines (BELs
produced in the BLR) by Montuori et al. (2011). They
considered the scenario described in Sect. 3, in which a
binary is orbiting in the low-density gap region within a
denser circumbinary disk. They further followed the com-
mon assumption that the secondary SMBH is more likely
36
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Year
−1.1
−1.0
−0.9
−0.8
−0.7
Velocity [103 km s−1]
J093844
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Year
−1.4
−1.2
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
J095036
2008
2010
2012
2014
Year
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
J161911
Figure 19: Radial velocity curves candidate SMBHBs at sub-parsec separation from Runnoe et al. (2017). Spectroscopic searches for SMBHBs
are sensitive to systems with periods of the order of tens to hundreds of years. Thus, the expected signal of the binary is a monotonic increase
or decrease of the radial velocity measurement over the duration of the monitoring campaign. These are strong candidates in the sense that
they display this signal and the SMBHB hypothesis cannot be ruled out based on current analyses.
to be active, being closer to the circumbinary disk inner
edge and having a lower relative velocity with respect to
the outer gas (Artymowicz and Lubow, 1994; Günther and
Kley, 2002; Hayasaki et al., 2007a; Roedig et al., 2011;
Farris et al., 2014). As a ﬁrst test, they assumed that the
binary is wide enough to neglect any contribution of the
outer circumbinary disk to the brightest BELs at optical-
UV rest-frame wavelengths.
Within this simple framework, Montuori et al. (2011)
analyzed the tidal truncation that the primary exerts onto
the secondary mini-disk, limiting the extent of the BLR.
Whenever the gas responsible for the emission of a given
Broad Emission Line (BEL) lies outside the secondary
Roche lobe radius, it is ejected toward the circumbinary
disk, decreasing the gas density in the vicinity of the active
SMBH and therefore decreasing the BEL luminosity. This
can result in an anomalous luminosity ratio between lines
that are produced by gas with diﬀerent spatial distribu-
tions, and is therefore expected to be more eﬀective when
comparing the observed ﬂuxes of lines with signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent ionization potentials.
Montuori et al. (2011) checked the eﬀect of binaries
of diﬀerent masses, luminosities, and separations on two
speciﬁc line ratios:
FMgII/FHβ and FMgII/FCIV.
They
computed the BEL ﬂux under the assumptions of the “lo-
cally optimally emitting clouds” model (e.g. Baldwin et al.,
1995). Each cloud is then assumed to emit a line luminos-
ity depending on the incoming AGN continuum ﬂux and
the local gas density, based on a grid of models computed
using the photoionization code cloudy (Ferland et al.,
1998).9
The FMgII/FHβ ratio has the advantage of being mea-
sured in large optical surveys (such as SDSS, see Sect. 1.1)
within the redshift range 0.4 ∼< z ∼< 0.8, allowing for a
cross search for shifted/asymmetric BELs and peculiar
FMgII/FHβ values. On the other hand, the expected num-
ber of SMBHBs observable at low redshift is at most of
the order of a few (Volonteri et al., 2009). The analysis
9For a detailed description of the procedure, we point the reader
to Sect. 3 of Montuori et al. (2011).
of the dependence of this ratio on the binary parameters
demonstrated that peculiar values are expected only in an
extremely limited range of the parameter space, due to
the similar ionization potential of the two elements, thus
strongly limiting the utility of the FMgII/FHβ ratio.10
The FMgII/FCIV line ratio can instead probe the AGN
population observed in large optical surveys at z ∼> 2, al-
lowing for the SMBHB search during the cosmic high noon,
when most of the galaxies and SMBHs where at the peak
of their growth. This second ratio is more aﬀected by the
tidal eﬀect of the primary, since the two lines are prefer-
entially emitted in spatially distinct regions.
Indeed, the FMgII/FCIV ratio was found to be reduced
by up to an order of magnitude for close binaries, with re-
spect to the ∼0.3–0.4 ratio expected for unperturbed BELs
around isolated SMBHs. It must be noticed, however, that
the FMgII/FCIV ratio is not expected to keep decreasing in-
deﬁnitely as the binary and the circumbinary disk shrink:
at semimajor axes < 0.01 pc the inner edge of the cir-
cumbinary disk is close enough to the active secondary
to emit eﬃciently the MgII BEL. This second eﬀect has
been described with a simple analytical model by Montuori
et al. (2012). Since the structure of the circumbinary disk
can in principle diﬀer signiﬁcantly from that of isolated
BLRs, Montuori et al. (2012) decided to take advantage of
the numerical simulations of SMBHB–circumbinary disk
systems presented in Sesana et al. (2012b). The simula-
tion results were post-processed with the code cloudy to
constrain the relative contribution of the gas within the
gap and in the outer disk.
The results of the numerical analysis were in remarkable
agreement with the simple analytical predictions: an or-
der of magnitude reduction in FMgII/FCIV is possible for
semimajor axes ∼(0.01 −0.2)(fEdd/0.1)1/2 pc, for a mass
of the secondary SMBH between 107 and 109 M⊙, and a
10A diﬀerent and less constraining strategy in the redshift range
0.4 ∼
< z ∼
< 0.8 is to search for Type I (i.e., unobscured) AGN having
all the observable broad lines peculiarly faint and broad, as observed
for example in the SMBHB candidate 4C+22.15, independently se-
lected because of the shifted BELs (Decarli et al., 2010).
37
binary mass ratio q = 0.3.11 These separations correspond
to orbital periods in the range ∼(20-200)(fEdd/0.1)3/4 yr,
making the search for other SMBHB signatures such as
BEL velocity variations and continuum variability stud-
ies possible but, due to the long monitoring required, ex-
tremely challenging.12
Sub-parsec separations: optical-X-ray synergies. A special
case – and a clear indication of the invaluable power of
synergies at diﬀerent wavelengths – is that of MCG+11-11-
032, a Seyfert 2 galaxy at z=0.036, originally selected from
the SDSS spectrum showing a double-peaked emission-
line proﬁle in [OIII]. Its Swift/BAT 123-month light curve
presents almost regular peaks and dips every ∼25 months,
while the Swift/XRT spectrum shows two narrow emission
lines at rest-frame energies of ∼6.16 keV and ∼6.56 keV
(Severgnini et al., 2018), interpreted as a double-peaked
iron Kα emission-line proﬁle and possibly ascribed to a
circumbinary accretion disk linked to two sub-pc scale
SMBHs (see Sect. 3).
These results make the binary
SMBH hypothesis highly plausible. Intriguingly, there is
also a remarkable agreement between the putative SMBH
pair orbital velocity derived from the Swift/BAT light
curve and the velocity oﬀset derived from the rest-frame
energies of the two X-ray lines. Further support to this pic-
ture has recently come from a careful time-domain anal-
ysis of the Swift/BAT data (Seraﬁnelli et al., in prep.).
While ﬁrmly establishing with present and future facilities
the presence of a sub-pc SMBH in this system will remain
quite challenging, this kind of investigation reﬂects the ca-
pability of X-ray and optical data in unveiling SMBH pair
candidates also in obscured sources and the potentialities
of all-sky X-ray monitorings in this uncharted territory.
4.3. Photometric searches for sub-pc SMBHBs
Another proposed method to search for compact active
SMBHBs is to identify quasars with photometric variabil-
ity. One generic conclusion of the hydrodynamic simula-
tions, discussed in Sect. 3, is that the net accretion rate
onto the SMBHs is signiﬁcant and can produce quasar-like
luminosities (D’Orazio et al., 2013; Farris et al., 2014; Shi
and Krolik, 2015; Ragusa et al., 2016). Additionally, the
mass accretion rate onto the SMBHs is modulated period-
ically (Hayasaki et al., 2007b; MacFadyen and Milosavlje-
vić, 2008; Roedig et al., 2012; D’Orazio et al., 2013; Farris
et al., 2014; Shi and Krolik, 2015), which may be translated
into periodic modulation of the brightness of the source.
11fEdd here corresponds to the bolometric luminosity of the accre-
tion process normalized to the Eddington limit of the secondary.
12All the above-mentioned estimates assume circular orbits.
At
ﬁxed semimajor axis, an eccentric binary could have a diﬀerent trun-
cation radius, depending on the ability of the material within the
secondary Roche lobe to readjust on the orbital period time-scale.
We stress, however, that due to the existence of a limiting orbital ec-
centricity ecrit ≈0.7 for binaries co-rotating with the circumbinary
disk (Roedig et al., 2011), the upper limit of the semimajor axes
quoted above increases by a factor 2–3 at most.
While periodic modulations in the accretion rate ap-
pear inevitable, relativistic Doppler boost can also cause
an SMBHB to exhibit periodic variability. For example, a
very unequal binary (q ∼< 0.04) may accrete steadily. How-
ever, if the binary is suﬃciently compact, such that orbital
velocities exceed v/c ∼> few per cent, we expect periodic
modulations from special relativity alone (D’Orazio et al.,
2015). More speciﬁcally, if the optical luminosity arises in
gas bound to the moving BHs (e.g., in the mini-disks seen
in hydrodynamical simulations), the binary appears blue-
shifted (and brighter for typical values of optical spectral
indices), when the more luminous SMBH (typically the less
massive SMBH) is moving towards the observer, and vice
versa. We note that this scenario is expected to produce
smooth quasi-sinusoidal variability, whereas in the case of
periodic accretion the periodicity may be more “bursty”.
The advent of the modern time domain surveys, which
systematically scan large areas of the sky, has allowed sta-
tistical searches for periodic variability in large samples
of quasars. More speciﬁcally, Graham et al. (2015) ana-
lyzed 245,000 spectroscopically conﬁrmed quasars from the
Catalina Real-time Transient Survey (CRTS) and identi-
ﬁed 111 candidates. Charisi et al. (2016) analyzed a sam-
ple of 35,000 spectroscopically conﬁrmed quasars from the
Palomar Transient Factory (PTF) and identiﬁed 33 can-
didates with signiﬁcant periodicity.
The two samples are somewhat complementary; the can-
didates from CRTS are relatively bright and have peri-
ods of ∼2 −6.5 yr, whereas the PTF candidates have
fainter magnitudes (and higher redshifts) and periods of
∼150 −800 days, owing to the higher photometric pre-
cision and higher cadence of the survey. Accounting for
selection eﬀects in the CRTS sample (candidates were se-
lected preferentially at the brightest end of the sample),
the occurrence rate of SMBHB candidates would be simi-
lar in both samples, ∼1/1000. Additionally, Charisi et al.
(2016) examined the candidates as a population and found
a preference for low-mass ratio binaries (q = 0.01) in both
samples (although this may be a selection eﬀect, since both
searches were sensitive to sinusoidal periodicity).
Several other individual candidates have recently ap-
peared in the literature, either from the analysis of smaller
samples or from serendipitous discoveries. For instance,
Liu et al. (2015) reported one candidate with period
of ∼550 days and a separation of 0.006 pc, from the
PanSTARRS Medium Deep Survey. However, follow-up
observations revealed that the periodicity of this candi-
date is not persistent (Liu et al., 2016b).
Zheng et al.
(2016) identiﬁed an additional candidate in CRTS with
two periodic components in the variability (∼741 days
and ∼1500 days) with the characteristic frequency ratio
1:2. This candidate was included in the sample of Graham
et al. (2015), but was not identiﬁed as periodic. Additional
candidates have emerged from the analysis of historical
long-baseline light curves of bright AGN (Li et al., 2016;
Bon et al., 2016) and the analysis of blazar light curves
from the Fermi gamma-ray telescope (Sandrinelli et al.,
38
2016, 2018a). Furthermore, Dorn-Wallenstein et al. (2017)
claimed the detection of a periodic AGN in PTF, which
was subsequently disputed by Barth and Stern (2018), who
highlight the importance of interpreting correctly the null
hypothesis simulation tests and and performing carefully
the calculation of the false alarm probability.
The controversial nature of the above candidates illus-
trates that identifying quasars with periodic variability
is challenging, mainly because the periods are relatively
long compared to the available baselines and the under-
lying variability of quasars is stochastic.
This was also
clearly demonstrated in the case of PG 1302-102 – the ﬁrst
(and brightest) candidate that emerged from the time do-
main surveys – the statistical signiﬁcance of which remains
controversial. Charisi et al. (2015) showed that the peri-
odogram peak of PG 1302-102 is statistically signiﬁcant
at the 1 per cent level compared to a Damped Random
Walk (DRW) model, but not signiﬁcant compared with
red noise variability.13 D’Orazio et al. (2015) showed that
a sinusoidal model is preferred compared to pure DRW
noise, whereas Vaughan et al. (2016), with a similar anal-
ysis, reached the opposite conclusion. The main diﬀerence
between the two is the choice of the DRW parameters. Liu
et al. (2018a) added more recent data from the ASAS-SN
(Shappee et al., 2014; Kochanek et al., 2017) survey and
suggested that the signiﬁcance of the periodicity decreases,
even though a sinusoidal model is still preferred compared
to a DRW model.
Vaughan et al. (2016) also suggested that the incomplete
knowledge of the underlying variability can lead to false
detections and therefore the above samples are likely con-
taminated by false positives. This was also suggested by
Sesana et al. (2018), who calculated the GW background
from the inferred population of binaries identiﬁed as peri-
odic quasars. They found that, in order for the population
to be consistent with the current upper limit from PTAs,
the masses or the mass ratios of the binaries have to be
unusually low. Therefore, as noted by Liu et al. (2016b), it
is crucial to continue monitoring the candidates, in order
to test the persistence of the periodicity and distinguish
the genuine SMBHBs from the false detections.
An alternative approach is to search for independent
lines of evidence for the binary nature of the candidates.
These include: 1) Multiple periodic components in the opti-
cal variability with a characteristic frequency pattern. For
q ∼> 0.3, several simulations have found that the inner cav-
ity in the accretion disk becomes lopsided (MacFadyen and
Milosavljević, 2008; Shi et al., 2012; Noble et al., 2012;
D’Orazio et al., 2013; Farris et al., 2014).
In this case,
the most prominent period is 3-8 times longer than the
orbital period. 2) Multi-wavelength signatures of relativis-
tic Doppler boost.
As mentioned above, the relativistic
Doppler boost can explain the quasi-sinuosoidal variability
13This 1 per cent does not include the trial factors that are asso-
ciated with large sample from which the source was chosen.
in optical bands. Additionally, if the UV/X-ray luminos-
ity also arises in gas bound to the BHs, their luminosity
should vary in tandem with the optical, but with ampli-
tudes which depend on the spectral curvature in the re-
spective bands. Therefore, the relativistic Doppler boost
scenario oﬀers a robust prediction, which can be tested
with multi-wavelength data (D’Orazio et al., 2015; Charisi
et al., 2018). The possible application of this technique will
be further discussed in Sect. 6.2. 3) Characteristic infrared
echoes. The optical/UV luminosity is produced in compact
regions close to the central BH. Subsequently, it is repro-
cessed by the dusty torus, and it is re-emitted in IR. When
the torus is illuminated anisotropically, e.g., if the source
of the torus irradiation is the moving secondary BH in a
binary, the IR light curve shows characteristic time lags
and amplitudes that can help distinguishing binaries from
a single central SMBH (D’Orazio and Haiman, 2017; Jun
et al., 2015). 4) Periodic self-lensing ﬂares. If the binary
is not too far from face-on (with inclination ∼< 30 deg),
the accretion disk of one BH is lensed when it passes be-
hind the other BH, which can produce bright X-ray/optical
ﬂares (Haiman, 2017; D’Orazio and Di Stefano, 2018). 5)
X-ray outburst from tidal disruption events. The tidal dis-
ruption of stars by SMBHs (tidal disruption events; TDEs)
causes a characteristic X-ray outburst lightcurve, which
declines as the stellar debris is accreted by the black hole
(see Komossa and Zensus 2016 for a review). Lightcurves
of TDEs which occur in SMBHB systems look characteris-
tically diﬀerent from TDEs of single black holes (Liu et al.,
2009). The lightcurves show dips and recoveries, as the
second SMBH acts as a perturber and temporarily inter-
rupts the accretion stream on the primary. Simulations
by Liu et al. (2014a) have shown, that the lightcurve of
the TDE in the inactive galaxy SDSS J1201+3003 (Sax-
ton et al., 2012) is consistent with a binary SMBH model
with a primary mass of 106M⊙, a mass ratio q = 0.1 and
a semi-major axis of 0.6 milli-pc. This method is of par-
ticular interest, since TDE rates in galaxy major mergers
are strongly enhanced by up to two orders of magnitude
with respect to single SMBH (Li et al., 2017), and it allows
to identify SMBHBs in non-active, quiescent host galax-
ies; conversely, essentially all other SMBHB identiﬁcation
methods discussed in this review require that at least one,
or both, SMBHs are active.
Part III
Future perspectives
In this section we describe the observational strategies that
will be available in the future to uncover dual and binary
AGN, using ground- and space-based facilities operating in
diﬀerent energy bands. As widely discussed in the previ-
ous sections, depending on the spatial separation, diﬀerent
techniques need to be applied in order to detect AGN dual
39
systems, AGN in close binaries, and SMBHs during the
latest phases of the inspiral and proper merger. We will
explore several of these techniques, starting from systems
at kpc separations down to µpc where the SMBHBs emit
GWs. We will describe recent advances in numerical sim-
ulations of circumbinary disks around SMBHBs and enter
the realm of GW observations.
As discussed in Sect. 1, so far, most of the dual- and
multiple-AGN on kpc scales have been found serendipi-
tously. In spite of the huge eﬀort put into carefully con-
structing selected samples using a number of observing
criteria, none of these appeared to be eﬃcient in discov-
ering dual AGN so far.
In the future our search strat-
egy will shift toward reasonably well identiﬁed samples
obtained by cross-matching various multi-waveband sur-
vey catalogs. Optical/NIR or MIR spectroscopy will be
needed to infer the redshift of the host galaxies and con-
ﬁrm a physical association. In order to discover kpc-scale
dual AGN, we describe below (without attempting to be
comprehensive) planned surveys and future instruments
dedicated to their search.
To
probe
the
10–100
pc
scales,
as
described
in
Sect. 2.2.3, we need radio interferometric observations with
very high-resolution. Having contemporary AGN activity
in the radio is much less likely than having dual AGN in
the optical and X-rays, but at low accretion rates AGN
become radio-loud, therefore sensitive radio instruments
will be essential probes in this regime. In particular, two
techniques can be mentioned: one relies on ﬁnding power-
ful transient radio sources – signalling new AGN activity
– near an already known AGN. The other one consists of
revealing dual activity comparing precision astrometry in
the optical and the radio bands.
The sub-pc regime presented in Sect. 4 will remain the
most challenging, although AGN variability studies are
quite promising. The breakthrough in this ﬁeld will come
with the advent of GW astronomy, that provides a direct
way of detecting orbiting SMBHBs probing scales between
∼10µpc and a few milli-pc, when the black holes are coa-
lescing or in the verge of merging, years to centuries before
the ﬁnal plunge.
5. Search for dual and multiple AGN in the era of
surveys
5.1. Radio surveys in the cm waveband
The Next Generation Very Large Array – ngVLA and
the Square Kilometre Array – SKA (and its precursors:
APERTIF, ASKAP, MeerKAT) are being (have been) de-
signed to be able to carry out deep surveys that cover a
large fraction of the sky.
These interferometers will be
complementary in various ways, and they will be syner-
gistic with ESFRI-listed facilities (CTA, KM3Net and E-
ELT) and other major observatories.
The VLA Sky Survey14 is being carried out at 2–4 GHz,
14https://science.nrao.edu/science/surveys/vlass/
and therefore will have improved sensitivity and angular
resolution compared to its predecessors at 1.4 GHz (NVSS
and FIRST; see Table 2). The large observing bandwidth
will allow for spectral index measurements, making these
data ideal to search for ﬂat-spectrum dual-AGN cores for
example. The VLASS potentials for AGN mergers with a
separation less than 7 kpc have been described in a white
paper by Burke-Spolaor et al. (2014, 2018). The ngVLA
(Murphy, 2018) would greatly expand the instantaneous
frequency range (1-116 GHz), the ﬁeld of view, and the
resolution of the array (with baselines at least 300 km).
The ngVLA will be capable of probing active massive black
holes and their feedback below 106 M⊙(Nyland et al.,
2018), entering a very interesting regime for dual-AGN
activity studies.
ASKAP (Johnston et al., 2007) and MeerKAT (Norris
et al., 2011) are SKA precursors employing diﬀerent tech-
nologies, but both are very fast survey machines (Table 2).
They will survey the Southern sky down to ∼µJy sensi-
tivities, and produce catalogs for tens of millions of radio
sources albeit with limited resolution. The mid-frequency
telescope of the phase-I SKA (SKA1-MID) will have more
power to distinguish between star formation and AGN ac-
tivity (with baselines up to ∼150 km). SKA1 Continuum
Surveys (SASS1; Prandoni and Seymour, 2015, and refer-
ences therein) top priority science cases include the star
formation history of the Universe, the role of black holes
in galaxy evolution, gravitational lensing and more. These
surveys will detect the bulk (∼90 per cent) of the AGN
population, the majority of which is missed in current ra-
dio surveys (Smolcic et al., 2015).
While SKA1-MID will have a resolution of ∼0.1−1 arc-
sec, the core of the array can be coherently phased up to
mimic a single radio telescope.
By combining this very
high sensitivity component with other radio telescopes
around the world one may form a powerful very long base-
line interferometry network, a concept known as SKA-
VLBI (Paragi et al., 2015). This is particularly relevant
for us, because very sensitive VLBI observations is the
only way to directly address the (hitherto) missing pop-
ulation of dual-AGN with a separation of a few (tens of)
parsec. SKA2 will have a sensitivity of at least an order
of magnitude higher than SKA1, and its resolution will
be about 20 times better, therefore it will be competitive
in resolution with current VLBI arrays. The SASS2 1.4
GHz survey of the southern sky will detect some 3.5 bil-
lion radio sources at high angular resolution (Norris et al.,
2015). These surveys will contain a huge number of dual-
AGN candidates, that can be further down-selected based
on radio spectral index, multi-band properties, and vari-
ability. This latter might reveal episodic accretion from
an otherwise inactive pair to an already well established
AGN, like the one recently discovered next to Cyg-A in
the mid-IR (Canalizo et al., 2003) and in the radio (Per-
ley et al., 2017). A possible form of episodic accretion is
represented by TDE, that are found to occur dominantly
in galaxies with post-starburst star formation history and
40
Table 2: Present and future high-resolution continuum radio surveys
Telescope
Survey
Resolution
Frequency
Sensitivity
Sky
[arcsec]
[GHz]
rms [µJy]
coverage
VLA
NVSS
45"
1.4
450
δ > −40 deg
VLA
FIRST
5"
1.4
150
104 deg2
VLA
VLASS
2.5"
2–4
70
δ > −40 deg
ASKAP
EMU
10"
1.13–1.43
10
δ < +30 deg
MeerKAT
MIGHTEE
6"
0.9–1.67
1
20 deg2
SKA1-MID*
SASS1
0.5–1"
0.95–1.76
4
δ < +30 deg
SKA2*
SASS2
∼0.1”
0.95–1.76
0.1
δ < +30 deg
*Indicative only. SKA surveys will have various tiers with diﬀerent parameters.
merger origin (Zabludoﬀet al., 1996; French et al., 2016;
Pﬁster et al., 2019a). The accretion rates are expected to
be higher in black holes with lower masses, such as in the
case of white-dwarf - intermediate-mass black hole encoun-
ters. Radio (and in fact multi-band) observation of TDEs
next to and already active nucleus will reveal exotic pairs
of dual-AGN. Note that these IMBH+WD encounters may
also lead to GW radiation that might be detectable by
LISA in the Local Group (Rosswog et al., 2009; Anninos
et al., 2018).
Finally, it is worth noting that VLBI oﬀers down to
∼10 µas level astrometric accuracy for bright radio AGN
(Fey et al., 2015). This has been matched recently with
the Gaia spacecraft in the optical, allowing for synergistic
studies of AGN positions for a large overlapping sample in
the radio and optical for the ﬁrst time. Objects with signif-
icant optical–radio positional oﬀsets may serve as natural
candidates for dual AGN that warrant follow-up observa-
tions (Orosz and Frey, 2013). According to the most recent
studies based on new Gaia data, the majority of signiﬁcant
(mas or sub-mas level) Gaia–VLBI oﬀsets occur down-
stream or upstream of the AGN jet (Kovalev et al., 2017;
Plavin et al., 2019). This suggests that in general strong
optical jet emission is present at least on 20–50 pc scales
from the central engine. In turn, optical–radio oﬀsets with
position angles signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of the jet
may indicate either dual AGN containing a radio-loud and
a radio-weak companion, or oﬀset/recoiling AGN. Further
Gaia data releases and improved VLBI astrometric solu-
tions hold the potential for identifying more dual AGN
candidates.
5.2. X-ray surveys
In the next decades, new X-ray observatories will greatly
enlarge the population of known AGN, in particular at
high redshift. The key players are eROSITA, Athena and,
possibly, AXIS and Lynx. Table 3 summarizes the main
properties of their scientiﬁc payload relevant to the obser-
vational study of dual AGN.
eROSITA (Merloni et al., 2012) is the primary instru-
ment on the Russian Spektrum-Roentgen-Gamma (SRG)
mission.
Successfully launched in July 2019, eROSITA
aims at performing a 4-year long survey of the X-ray sky.
Building on the experience of the ROSAT All-Sky Sur-
vey (Voges et al., 1999; Boller et al., 2016), eROSITA
will be about 20 times more sensitive in the 0.5–2 keV
energy band, while providing the ﬁrst true imaging sur-
vey of the hard (2–10 keV) X-ray sky. Among the main
scientiﬁc goals of eROSITA, AGN studies feature promi-
nently. eROSITA aims at determining the accretion his-
tory of SMBHs by studying in unprecedented details the X-
ray AGN luminosity function, in particular the still poorly
understood luminosity-dependent fraction of obscured ob-
jects; studying the clustering properties of X-ray selected
AGN at least up to z ∼2; and identifying rare AGN sub-
populations such as high-redshift, possibly highly obscured
nuclei.
This will be possible thanks to a large sample
of about 3 million AGN to be detected during the nomi-
nal survey, of which several tens of thousands at redshift
higher then 3, and a few thousands with bolometric lumi-
nosities larger than 1046 erg s−1. The angular resolution
will be comparable to that of XMM-Newton, ∼16′′ Half-
Energy Width (HEW) on-axis, and ∼28′′ averaged over
the whole 1-degree diameter Field-of-View (FoV). This will
limit the redshift range on which dual AGN with a sep-
aration ≤100 kpc can be resolved to the local Universe
(z ≤0.3; see Fig. 20). The moderate spectral resolution
(∼130 eV at 6 keV, similar to present-day CCD-based in-
struments) will not allow eﬃcient spectral separation of
unresolved galaxy-AGN pairs. However, the eROSITA ob-
serving cadence in the survey phase – most of the sky will
be revisited approximately every 6 months, with the poles
being monitored with higher cadence – will allow each lo-
cation of the sky to get visited at least eight times in the
four years of the mission, so detection of AGN via vari-
ability also in dual systems will be viable. Such a search
will however be possible only for relatively bright systems
at the large separations allowed by eROSITA spatial reso-
lution, coupled with a proper spectroscopic identiﬁcation
of the variability-detected sources.
Athena is a L-(Large) Class X-ray observatory in the
Cosmic Vision Program of the European Space Agency
(Nandra et al., 2013), due to launch in early 2030s. Athena
will combine a collecting area at 1 keV more than one or-
der of magnitude larger than any existing or planned X-
ray mission, and a 5′′ on-axis HEW mirror with a very
41
Table 3: Performance of the X-ray payload discussed in Sect. 5.2. Legenda: HEW = High Energy Width, averaged over the FoV (ﬁeld-of-view);
sensitivity: in erg s−1 cm−2 in the 0.5-2 keV energy range; the sky coverage is at the “Sensitivity” ﬂux.
Payload
HEW
FoV
Energy range (keV)
Sensitivity
Sky coverage
eROSITA/SRG
28"
1.03◦dm.
0.3–10
≈10−14
All sky
WFI/Athena
6"
40’×40’
0.2-12
≈3×10−17
30 deg2
Lynx
0.5"
22’×22’
0.5-10
≈3×10−19
20 deg2
gentle performance degradation over the ﬁeld-of-view of
the Wide Field Imager (WFI). This is a Silicon Active
Pixel Sensor camera with a large FoV (40’×40’), high-
count rate capabilities, and CCD-like energy resolution
(about 150 eV at 6 keV). This combination will allow a
survey speed more than two orders of magnitude faster
than Chandra and XMM-Newton. Thanks to a multi-tier
survey strategy covering almost 30 Ms during the 4-year
nominal operational life, Athena will probe an AGN popu-
lation more than two orders of magnitude fainter than the
SDSS and Euclid QSOs. At the end of the nominal sur-
vey, Athena will have detected over 400,000 AGN, probing
several thousand AGN at z ≥4, a few hundred at z ≥6,
and several tens of Compton-thick AGN at the peak of the
accreting black hole activity. Its average angular resolu-
tion over the WFI FoV (∼6′′) will allow probing dual AGN
down to a separation of a few tens of kpc (see Fig. 20). A
new observational window in X-rays will be opened by the
other instrument onboard Athena, the X-ray Integral Field
Units (X-IFU), thanks to its unprecedented spectroscopic
capabilites (down to few eV). As outlined in McKernan
and Ford (2015), it will be possible, in nearby AGN, to
search for the presence of binary systems (with q ∼> 0.01
and moderate, < 0.1, eccentricity) separated by several
hundreds gravitational radii. Radial velocity shifts will be
imprinted on the broad iron Kα line due to oscillations
of a massive black hole around its barycenter, therefore
multiple observations of the same object will eventually
provide the imprints of the presence of a binary system
close to merger. Furthermore, if both AGN in a binary,
obscured system are emitting ﬂuorescence iron lines and
if their diﬀerence in systemic velocity is larger than few
hundreds km/s (as NGC 6240), it will be possible, for suf-
ﬁciently long (∼Ms) exposures, to spectrally resolve close
systems through an analysis of the iron line energy peaks
(Piconcelli et al., in prep.).
On a longer time-scale, Lynx 15 is a concept study for
consideration by NASA in the context of the forthcoming
2020 Astrophysics Decadal Survey.
The main technical
advancement of this proposed mission is a densely-packed,
thin grazing incidence mirror with an eﬀective area of 2 m2
at 1 keV, and sub-arc second angular resolution over a
high-deﬁnition X-ray imager in the focal plane. Lynx is
expected to push the quest for young SMBHs in the very
early Universe by two orders of magnitude in intrinsic lu-
minosity. Its exquisite angular resolution, well matching
15https://wwwastro.msfc.nasa.gov/lynx/
Figure 20: Resolvable distance (in kpc) versus redshift for the future
X-ray facilities discussed in this paper. The quantity on the y-axis
is twice the angular resolution (in units of Half-Energy Width) fol-
lowing Ranalli et al. (2013). From top to bottom: eROSITA (average
HEW), eROSITA (on-axis), Athena, and Lynx.
that of JWST and WFIRST, will allow to study binary
AGN with a separation down to a few kpc over a very
wide redshift range (Fig. 20). In particular, the large ﬁeld-
of-view of WFIRST Wide-Field Instrument, 0.8×0.4 deg2,
coupled to its sensitivity, is ideal for surveys purposes, and
will provide optical/near-IR counterparts to faint and/or
obscured AGN pairs detected by Lynx.
Along the pathway outlined by Lynx in terms of sub-arc
second angular resolution and larger than Chandra eﬀec-
tive area, we need to mention AXIS, which is a probe-class
NASA mission under study for the 2020 Decadal Survey
(Mushotzky, 2018). Although AXIS is characterized by
much lower sensitivity compared to Lynx (being, however,
10× better than Chandra over a 24×24 arcmin2 ﬁeld-of-
view), it will allow detection and characterization of kpc-
scale AGN pairs up to high redshift, with a foreseen launch
for 2028.
Hard X-rays are able to trace accretion even in obscured
AGN, with some limitations for the most heavily obscured
systems.
As such, they are an ideal tool in the hunt
for multiple active nuclei in a galaxy, providing typically
a higher contrast with respect to stellar-related emission
processes than observations at other wavelengths. The ca-
pability of detecting nuclear, accretion-related emission in
galaxies with limited (or negligible) indications of an active
nucleus at other wavelengths is therefore one of the major
advantages of X-ray observations, although the planned X-
ray missions described above, eROSITA and Athena, will
42
have poor and moderate angular resolution, respectively,
thus strongly limiting the possibilities of disclosing and
properly characterizing close (< kpc) dual systems if both
members are active. The high point-like luminosity, the
non-thermal spectral shape of the continuum and the pres-
ence of a strong Fe line emission in the X-ray spectrum are
clear signatures allowing to discriminate the presence of
an AGN with respect to potential astrophysical “contami-
nants” such as hot shocked gas in region of intense nuclear
star formation. However, the success of any strategies to
identify AGN through X-ray surveys invariably hinges on
a synergetic approach with facilities at other wavelengths.
These synergies work bi-directionally, both trough X-ray
follow-ups of candidates identiﬁed at other wavelengths,
or by campaigns in optical/IR (OIR) to identify the AGN
counterparts of X-ray sources.
An example of the former aspect is the potential synergy
between SKA and Athena. The sky survey at 1.4 GHz of
the ﬁrst-phase SKA (SASS1 starting at early 2020’s) will
provide the sky map (3π steradians) to an r.m.s. of about 4
µJy/beam (1σ) with a resolution of 1". SASS1 will there-
fore be a powerful detector of low-luminosity AGN (∼1039
erg s−1) even for the radio-quiet population16. As such, it
will be invaluable resource for investigation of systems of
dual and multiple AGN. At these faint ﬂux densities, the
main population consists of a mixture of both star-forming
galaxies and radio-quiet AGN and diﬀerent techniques are
needed in order to distinguish among these two popula-
tions: radio morphology, spectral index, polarization, vari-
ability, radio-infrared ratio, optical and IR colours, SEDs,
optical line ratios, X-ray power. Athena follow-up can give
a fundamental contribution in the identiﬁcation of AGN
and in the estimate of the nuclear properties through X-
ray luminosity and spectroscopy: the WFI will follow-up
the SASS1 sources in multiple systems and detect, even in
the case of strong absorption, all nuclei at moderate angu-
lar separation (>5′′); in addition, the X-IFU will be able
to separate the non-thermal from the soft thermal (star-
burst) component, and provide an accurate determination
of basic astrophysical parameters for both components (lu-
minosity, temperature/spectral index, strength and ioniza-
tion state of nuclear reprocessing features).
Identiﬁcation of the OIR counterparts of sources de-
tected in the few tens square degrees of the Athena
WFI and eROSITA surveys will rely on a large set of
multi-wavelength data that will be available through e.g.
Subaru-HSC, SDSS V, LSST (see Sect. 5.3), and WFIRST.
The last two facilities, however, will not be available at the
time the eROSITA survey is completed.
Moreover, the
comparatively poor angular resolution of eROSITA adds
further uncertainties to the counterpart identiﬁcation with
respect to, e.g., XMM-Newton.
16AGN with log(Rx) < −4.5, where Rx is radio loudness deﬁned
as the luminosity ratio between the luminosity densities at 5 GHz
and in the 2–10 keV band; see Terashima and Wilson 2003.
5.3. Optical spectroscopy
While the upcoming X-ray missions eROSITA and
Athena will provide a large number of X-ray sources (as
discussed above), subsequent characterization of the AGN
nature and precise redshift measurements are only possi-
ble with large spectroscopic surveys. New wide-ﬁeld opti-
cal spectrographs such as WHT/WEAVE (Dalton et al.,
2012), VISTA/4MOST (see Merloni et al. 2012 for an in-
depth discussion of the natural synergies with eROSITA)
or ELT/HARMONI (see Padovani et al. 2017 for a review)
will provide the necessary numbers and depth to statisti-
cally evaluate the fraction of dual AGN among all galaxy
pairs down to a certain separation and AGN luminosity.
The characterization and identiﬁcation of obscured
AGN in optical spectroscopy still rely mainly on classical
narrow emission-line diagnostics (e.g. Baldwin et al., 1981;
Veilleux and Osterbrock, 1987), which are able to distin-
guish AGN photoionization from other ionization mechan-
sims due to the hardness of the AGN spectrum at UV
wavelength. However, line ratios may be signiﬁcantly af-
fected by mixing AGN photoionization with ionization by
star-forming regions (e.g. Davies et al., 2014; Trump et al.,
2015) which makes a unique characterization diﬃcult, in
particular at high redshifts where the systematic decrease
in gas-phase metallicity leads to rather similar line ratios
for the diﬀerent ionization processes (e.g Kewley et al.,
2013; Trump et al., 2013; Steidel et al., 2014; Coil et al.,
2015).
Integral-ﬁeld unit (IFU) spectroscopy can migi-
tate those eﬀects to some degree as ionization sources can
be spatially separated much better than in ﬁber-based or
long-slit spectroscopy.
Large IFU spectroscopic surveys
like CALIFA (Sánchez et al., 2012), SAMI (Croom et al.,
2012) and MaNGA (Bundy et al., 2015) allow to system-
atically identify AGN at low redshifts through kpc-scale
AGN ionization even if the integrated or central galaxy
spectra are dominated by ionization from star formation
(Wylezalek et al., 2018).
In addition, the detection of
higher ionization lines, like the HeII λ4685 in the rest-
frame optical wavelength range (Bär et al., 2017) or the
HeII λ1480 in the rest-frame far-UV wavelength range
(Feltre et al., 2016), oﬀer a promising alternative to charac-
terize faint obscured AGN at low and high redshifts. The
HeII λ1480 line can be observed at high redshift in the
optical wavelength so that high-sensitive wide-ﬁeld IFUs
such as VLT/MUSE or Keck/KCWI oﬀer the unique op-
portunity to detect faint type 2 obscured narrow-line AGN
at small separation down to the seeing limit.
Overdensities of multiple AGN separated by a few 10s
of kpc have been detected this way within a few giant
Lyα nebulae (Cantalupo et al., 2014; Hennawi et al., 2015;
Cai et al., 2017; Arrigoni Battaia et al., 2018).
Hence,
dual AGN can be resolved and studied in merging galaxy
systems at high redshifts with separations of much less
than 30 kpc (e.g. Husemann et al., 2018). Many more close
obscured AGN multiple systems with kpc-scale separation
will be likely been detected at z ∼2−4 using this technique
in the future.
43
5.4. Mid-IR imaging and spectroscopy
Motivated by the outstanding scientiﬁc results obtained
by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), its successor, the
JWST, will push our view to longer wavelengths beyond
the HST capabilities. With its larger collecting area (i.e.
25.4 m2, 6.25 times bigger than HST), higher sensitivity,
and ﬁner angular resolution at wavelengths shorter than
28.8µm, JWST will outclass Hubble’s imaging potential in
the infrared and will provide a factor of 5-7 better spec-
tral resolution than the Spitzer/IRS high-resolution instru-
ment. As a result, JWST will provide both high angular
resolution imaging and spectroscopy at mid-infrared wave-
length to identify obscured dual AGN via the emission of
the molecular torus in the mid-infrared.
Speciﬁcally, the NIRCam imaging and spectroscopic
modes covering the wavelength range 0.6–6 µm (angu-
lar resolution of 0.07′′, Greene et al. 2017) and the Mid-
Infrared Instrument (MIRI, 5–28 µm) will have a supe-
rior spatial resolution at λ > 1µm (i.e. 0.031′′ at 0.6–2.3
µm against the 0.13′′ of HST at 0.9–1.7 µm) and will pro-
vide a ×50 better sensitivity with respect to Spitzer/IRAC
(Rieke et al., 2015b,a). The Infrared Field Unit Near In-
fraRed Spectrograph (NIRSpec), which operates over a
wavelength range of 0.6 to 5.3 µm, in the highest spec-
tral resolution mode is a factor of ∼5 better than the
highest resolution spectrograph on Spitzer-IRS.
With this exquisite spectral coverage, JWST oﬀers us
the opportunity to study the accretion disk emission re-
processed in the infrared by the dust surrounding the
SMBH through accurate torus models, measure extended
emission-line structures (i.e. ionization cones, outﬂows),
and reconstruct the gas kinematics as never done before.
Although JWST is not properly a survey instrument (be-
cause of the limited ﬁeld-of-view), its imaging from NIR to
MIR will cover signiﬁcant areas on deep ﬁelds which will
probe a signiﬁcant volume at high redshift.
Larger areas of the sky (10×10 arcmin2) will be covered
at MIR wavelengths (∼17 −34 µm) in photometric/low-
resolution spectroscopic mode by the Space Infrared Tele-
scope for Cosmology and Astrophysics, SPICA with the
SMI/CAM instrument. SPICA (Roelfsema et al., 2018),
selected as a new-mission concept study by ESA for M5,
will also probe the physics of accreting systems using the
mid-IR/far-IR emission lines thanks to the ∼34 −230 µm
coverage of the Safari instrument, thus potentially extend-
ing the studies of such systems up to very high redshifts.
6. The quest for hard SMBH binaries
6.1. AGN variability
Time-domain surveys in the 2020s will provide power-
ful datasets for selecting SMBHB candidates whose na-
ture can be tested with follow-up observations.
The
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), scheduled for
ﬁrst light in 2020, will be the ﬂagship time-domain ma-
chine.
The well sampled, long-duration, high signal-to-
noise light curves from LSST, in combination with the un-
precedented sample size of about a million quasars, will
be the best database for identifying candidate SMBHBs,
based on (semi)periodic variability.
LSST is currently under construction on Cerro Pachón
in the Chilean Andes. The telescope features an eﬀective
aperture of 6.7 m and will be equipped with a 9.2 deg2
ﬁeld-of-view survey camera and ugrizy ﬁlter set, spanning
the range from the atmospheric cutoﬀin the UV to the
limit of CCD sensitivity in the near-infrared. A dedicated
survey telescope, LSST will rapidly scan large areas of
the sky to faint magnitudes, fulﬁlling its “wide-fast-deep”
mantra.
LSST will spend 85-90 per cent of its time on a 10-year
time-domain photometric survey covering 18,000 deg2 of
the sky. The “baseline cadence” that allows LSST to meet
its science goals is laid out by Ivezić et al. (2008) and de-
scribed in the LSST observing strategy white paper17. Ac-
cording to this cadence, LSST would scan the observable
sky every 3 nights in back-to-back pairs of 15 s exposures,
called visits. The survey would reach median single-visit
depths of 23.14, 24.47, 24.16, 23.40, 22.23, 21.57 and have
a median number of 62, 88, 199, 201, 180, 180 visits in
ugrizy, respectively, from 2,293 overlapping ﬁelds. How-
ever, the LSST cadence is not yet set and the Observing
Strategy White Paper describes the ongoing work in the
community to optimize it. One alternative to the base-
line cadence’s spatially uniform annual tiling of the sky
that is being explored is a “rolling cadence” that focuses
on diﬀerent parts of the survey area in diﬀerent years.
LSST will spend 10-15 per cent of its time on specialized
projects, including the Deep Drilling Fields (DDFs). These
will receive a higher cadence than the 10-year survey,
with the possibility of doing AGN variability science for
104−5 AGN. So far, four multi-wavelength ﬁelds have been
selected:
ELAIS-S1, XMM-LSS, Extended CDF-S, and
COSMOS. The deﬁnition of additional DDFs and other
specialized projects (mini-surveys) is extremely open, with
decisions ongoing up to and beyond LSST ﬁrst light. It
is worth noting that the ﬁnal decisions on the observ-
ing strategy will aﬀect how eﬃciently LSST can detect
SMBHB candidates. For instance, if the “rolling cadence”
is selected, it may not allow LSST to build the long base-
lines that are necessary for the search of SMBHB. Addi-
tionally, even though LSST will have a nominal cadence
of 3 days, given that the ﬁlters are successively alternated,
the light curves in each band will contain a dozen dat-
apoints every year.
Techniques like the multi-band pe-
riodogram (VanderPlas and Ivezić, 2015) have been de-
veloped to coherently take full advantage of the multi-
ple time series.
Nevertheless, it is unclear if they can
17The LSST Observing Strategy white paper is a live docu-
ment available https://github.com/LSSTScienceCollaborations/
ObservingStrategy/tree/master/whitepaper.
44
be extended to quasar light curves, where the variabil-
ity is colour-dependent.
Another challenge is presented
from the large available sample; this will pose signiﬁcant
statistical challenges in order to robustly ﬁlter false peri-
odic detections. On the positive side, LSST is likely to
dramatically improve our understanding of the underlying
quasar variability, which eventually will facilitate the pe-
riodicity search. Additionally, the LSST data streams can
be combined with existing time-domain data, from sur-
vey like CRTS, providing light curves with long baselines
and high-quality data, which are necessary for this kind of
analysis.
In addition to candidates found from the growing body
of all-sky photometric surveys including LSST, many more
will come with the dawn of complementary “panoptic spec-
troscopy”. Pioneering this frontier, the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey V (SDSS V, Kollmeier et al. 2017) will be the ﬁrst
homogeneous, wide spectral coverage all-sky multi-epoch
spectroscopic survey.
SDSS V will last 5 years and science will be grouped
into the Local Volume Mapper (LVM), Milky Way Map-
per (MWM), and Black Hole Mapper (BHM) programs,
with that last being the most relevant for ﬁnding grav-
itationally bound SMBHBs.
The BHM program en-
compasses three scientiﬁc areas: eROSITA spectroscopic
follow-up, reverberation mapping, and an all-sky multi-
epoch spectroscopic survey. eROSITA will be a key player
in searches for dual AGN via sensitive X-ray imaging
surveys (Sect. 5.2) and BHM will provide spectroscopic
identiﬁcation and redshifts for ∼400,000 eROSITA X-ray
sources (primarily AGN at high Galactic latitude) in the
ﬁrst ∼1.5 years of the survey. BHM will also build on the
SDSS-IV reverberation-mapping and time-domain spec-
troscopic survey (TDSS) programs to deliver new black
hole mass measurements for ∼1000 −1500 0.1 < z < 4.5
quasars/AGN and a few to a dozen epochs of spectroscopy
per target for 25,000 quasars spanning temporal baselines
of months to a decade. For most of the sky, this dataset
will not yield enough spectroscopic epochs to fully popu-
late radial velocity curves for SMBHB candidates. How-
ever, it will provide a starting point for follow-up cam-
paigns and enable a critical benchmark measurement of
how normal quasars vary on a wide range of timescales.
In the high-energy domain, it is worth mentioning The
planned future Chinese X-ray mission Einstein Probe, a
dedicated time-domain soft X-ray all-sky monitor aim-
ing at detecting X-ray transients including TDEs in large
numbers (Yuan et al., 2016). It will provide well-covered
lightcurves. These will allow us to search systematically
for the characteristic phases of intermittency and recov-
ery in the lightcurves from TDEs which happen in binary
SMBHs (see Sect. 4.3). This method will provide a census
of the SMBHB fraction in quiescent galaxies, once enough
lightcurves have been obtained.
From an X-ray spectroscopic perspective, for relatively
bright and local sources, Athena will allow to associate pe-
culiarities in the iron line features (i.e., double-peaked iron
Kα emission-line proﬁle, as reported in Severgnini et al.
2018; see Sect. 4.2.2) with the presence of a sub-kpc scale
dual AGN. Moreover, variability of the iron line, as de-
scribed in Sect. 5.2 (see McKernan and Ford 2015), will
oﬀer another viable, though challenging, possibility to dis-
close the presence of dual nuclei at close separation.
6.2. Theory and Simulations
We discuss here in detail the properties of SMBHBs em-
bedded in circum-binary disks, expanding on the theoret-
ical background summarized in Sect. 3. Simulations have
now followed binaries to merger in pseudo-Newtonian po-
tentials (Tang et al., 2018) or very close to merger in full
GR (Bowen et al., 2019) where space-time is violently
changing (see also Sect. 7.1).
These, and previous sim-
ulations of SMBHBs embedded in circumbinary disks are
converging on the following signatures.
Periodicities.
The mass inﬂow rate across the cavity
folows particular patterns, arising from modulation of the
gas inﬂow on the binary’s orbital period and half-orbital
period, as well as on the factor of few longer time-scales
corresponding to the orbital period at the cavity wall.
In particular, the variability structure of the mass accre-
tion rates seen in simulations can be roughly divided into
four distinct categories, based on the binary mass ratio
q ≡M2/M1.
For q ∼< 0.05, the disk is steady and the
BH accretion rate displays no strong variability (D’Orazio
et al., 2013; Farris et al., 2014; D’Orazio et al., 2016). For
0.05 ∼< q ∼< 0.3, the accretion rate varies periodically on
the timescale tbin, with additional periodicity at ≈0.5tbin.
Binaries with 0.3 ∼< q ∼< 0.8 clear a lopsided central cavity
in the disk, causing variability on three timescales. The
dominant period, (3−8)tbin is that of an over-dense lump,
orbiting at the ridge of the cavity, with additional periodic-
ities at tbin and ≈0.5tbin (MacFadyen and Milosavljević,
2008; Shi et al., 2012; Noble et al., 2012; Roedig et al.,
2012; Farris et al., 2014; D’Orazio et al., 2016). The dom-
inant period depends on the size of the cavity, and thus
on disk parameters, such as temperature and viscosity. Fi-
nally, equal-mass (q = 1) binaries display variability at the
longer lump period and at ≈0.5tbin.
Enhanced brightness.
As emphasized by Farris et al.
(2015b), the heating of the gas near the binary is domi-
nated by shocks, rather than the usual viscous dissipation
for a single-BH disk.
As a result, the total luminosity
of the binary can signiﬁcantly exceed, even by 1-2 orders
of magnitude, that of a Shakura-Sunyaev disk with the
same mass and external large-scale accretion rate (see also
Lodato et al. 2009; Kocsis et al. 2012b,a). Interestingly,
the additional power must come at the expense of the
binary’s binding energy, and is therefore directly tied to
disk’s contribution to the binary’s inspiral rate (although
this extra energy source does not exist if the disk torques
are positive and cause an outspiral, rather than an inspi-
ral; see Tang et al. 2017; Muñoz et al. 2019; Moody et al.
45
2019). Also interestingly, this point was noted in the con-
text of pre-main sequence stellar binaries by Terquem and
Papaloizou (2017).
Unusual spectral shapes.
The shock-heating, together
with the evacuation of the gas from the central cavity
around the binary, also changes signiﬁcant distortions
in the spectral shape, compared to the usual Shakura-
Sunyaev disk.
In particular, there can be a “notch” in
the spectrum, at the frequencies where the emission, in
the absence of a binary, would have been dominated by
the gas missing from the cavity (Sesana et al., 2012b;
Gültekin and Miller, 2012; Roedig et al., 2014), although
this notch can be partially ﬁlled in by the emission from
the shock-heated mini-disks and accretion streams in
the cavity (Farris et al., 2015b).
On the other hand,
strong shock-heating in the innermost regions (near the
cavity’s ridge, and inside the cavity) can give rise to
unusually hard spectra at higher frequencies, making
the spectrum extend to much harder photon energies
than for a Shakura-Sunyaev disk, possibly also leading to
unusually strong broad-line emission.
As anticipated in Sect. 6.1, variability with LSST will
provide a powerful set of data for selecting good SMBHBs
through their periodic signal.
More challenging will be the observations of brightest
sources or AGN with a peculiar X-ray proﬁle in the hard-
est energy bands (above 10 keV). In fact, a bump above
10 keV peaking at 30 keV is commonly observed in AGN
and possibly associated to the well known Compton hump
(George and Fabian, 1991). This component, along with
the ﬂuorescence Fe line, is produced through the inverse
Compton of photons from the central hot region (the so-
called emitting corona) on the optically-thick accretion
disk within the AGN. Nevertheless, the two models (single
BH accretion disk and circumbinary disks) should produce
ﬂux variability in diﬀerent timescales (order of few tens of
seconds in single 108 M⊙BH accretion disks). In this di-
rection, future time-resolved spectral analysis would help
to break the degeneracy, and then disentangle the origin
of the observed spectral signature.
7. GW horizons
In the near future, observations of SMBHBs through
their low-frequency GW emission (from nHz 0.1Hz; see
Fig. 21) promise to be revolutionary in our understanding
of the formation and growth of SMBHs.
GWs are ripples in spacetime propagating at the speed of
light, generated by accelerated masses with a time-varying
non-zero mass quadrupole moment (Thorne, 1987).
Bi-
nary systems of two compact objects are therefore ideal
sources of GWs. In particular, SMBHBs are among the
loudest sources of GWs when observed during the phases of
late inspiral and coalescence (Sathyaprakash and Schutz,
2009).
Four simple notions are worth of mention in this con-
text. First, circular binaries emit sinusoidal GWs at twice
their orbital frequency, while eccentric binaries emit at fre-
quencies that are multiples of the orbital frequency (Peters
and Mathews, 1963). As rule of thumb, GWs circularize
any initially eccentric orbit, but some residual eccentricity
can remain at coalescence if, e.g., the binary hardened in a
triple interaction (Bonetti et al., 2019), or is detect during
its secualar adiabatic contraction (as for the case of PTA
sources discussed below).
Second, the strain amplitude h of a GW, which is the
sum of the two polarization states of the wave, weighted
through the antenna pattern of the detector, is a well un-
derstood function of the binary parameters and the main
scaling of h with key parameters to the source are high-
lighted in this formula
h ∼(GMz)5/3
c4DL
(πf)2/3,
(4)
where M = (1 + z)M1M2/(M1 + M2) is the redshifted
chirp mass of the binary, DL its luminosity distance and
f = fr/(1 + z) is the observed GW frequency (being fr
the frequency in the source rest frame). Third, during the
inspiral, the frequency fr sweeps to higher values as the
binary contracts, in response to the energy loss by GWs.
Its rate of change, in the observer frame is
˙f = 96
5 π3/8
GMz
c3
5/3
f 11/3.
(5)
The chirp refers to the phase of inspiral when both h and
f increase with time, until coalescence. Measuring ˙f pro-
vides an accurate determination of the chirp mass Mz, and
an estimate of the time to coalescence. Coalescence occurs
at a frequency close to ∼c3/GM, where M = M1 + M2 is
the total mass of the binary in the source frame.
Fourth, the plus of GW observations is that they will
not give “candidates” but rather “secure detections”; pro-
viding that the analysis is not faulty, there is not much
room left for alternative interpretation of clear GW sig-
nals (see, e.g., Abbott et al., 2016). On the minus side, our
“secure detections” of GWs events will have poor sky local-
ization (Klein et al., 2016; Goldstein et al., 2018), which
will generally make coincident EM identiﬁcation or follow-
ups rather problematic (see detailed discussion in Sect. 7.1
and Sect. 7.2)18.
In the following, we brieﬂy discuss the two low-frequency
observational windows that will soon become extremely
18This was not the case for the merging neutron star binary
GW170817 (Abbott et al., 2017a), which resulted in a spectacular
multi-wavelength observational campaign (Abbott et al., 2017b) de-
spite an initial GW sky localization of ≈30deg2. Although this is
promising, one should bear in mind that low-frequency EM sources
are expected to be observed at much further distances, and their
emission is likely going to be Eddington limited, making them much
fainter than short gamma-ray bursts.
46
Figure 21: Characteristic strain amplitude versus frequency of binaries in the GW landscape. The black curves are the sensitivity of LISA,
Advanced LIGO and Virgo, and various PTA experiments.
In the PTA band, the GW signal (blue jagged line) is characterized by the
incoherent superposition of quasi-monochromatic binaries (lavender diamonds).
Blue triangles show a sample of individually resolvable
SMBH binaries. In the LISA band, loudest sources will be merging SMBH binaries, shown here by the blue tracks. Other sources include
extreme mass ratio inspirals (EMRIs, orange tracks) and stellar mass BHBs (pale and dark blue ticks). The LIGO/Virgo band is the realm
of stellar mass compact objects, and typical tracks are shown in purple. From Colpi and Sesana (2017).
relevant for SMBH binary science.
The mHz frequency
range will be probed by LISA (Amaro-Seoane et al., 2017),
the third ESA L-class mission scheduled for launch in 2034.
The nHz frequency window is currently probed by PTAs
(Foster and Backer, 1990), and future radio instruments
such as FAST (Nan et al., 2011) and SKA (Dewdney et al.,
2009) will provide a signiﬁcant contribution.
7.1. LISA: probing the SMBH assembly from their infancy
LISA
will
detect
merging
SMBH
binaries
from
few×103 M⊙to few×107 M⊙everywhere in the Universe
(Colpi et al., 2019).
Expected detection rates are un-
certain, varying between several to few hundred over the
planned 4-year mission lifetime (Klein et al., 2016; Bonetti
et al., 2019). Note that, although the bulk of these events
will involve SMBHBs with M < 105 M⊙at z > 5, EM
observations will be greatly facilitated by more massive
(M > 106 M⊙) and closer (z < 3) systems (McGee et al.,
2018), which might be detected by LISA at a rate of few
per year.
One important question to address is whether the bi-
nary would remain bright and periodic all the way to
merger.
Naively, one would expect that this is not the
case; as mentioned in Sect. 3, at a binary separation of
∼100Rs (Schwarzschild radii), the GW-driven inspiral
timescale becomes shorter than the local viscous time and
the binary “decouples” from the disk. Past this stage, the
runaway binary leaves the disk behind, which is unable
to follow the rapidly shrinking binary (Liu et al., 2003;
Milosavljević and Phinney, 2005). Encouragingly, it has
now been demonstrated that this is not the case. Farris
et al. (2015a), Tang et al. (2018) and Bowen et al. (2018,
2019) have performed simulations of GW-driven nearly
equal-mass binaries all the way to merger. The former sim-
ulations started binary evolution from an initial separation
prior to the ﬁducial decoupling, and the last from a sep-
aration encompassing twelve orbits prior merging. These
studies have shown that the gas is able to accrete onto the
black holes, all the way to the merger, despite the rapid
contraction of the binary orbit. The physical reason for
this is that the angular momentum from the gas can be
removed by gravitational torques and shocks caused by
the binary, which dominate over viscosity, and operate on
much shorter time-scales.
47
3D MHD simulations in GR (Bowen et al., 2018, 2019)
have conﬁrmed that strong gravity develops an m = 1 az-
imuthal asymmetry (or lump) in the circumbinary disk,
which quasi-periodically modiﬁes the accretion ﬂow into
the central cavity and thus to the mini-disks.
Radial
pressure gradients accelerate the inﬂow rate on the black
holes well beyond that associated with stresses arising from
MHD turbulence, dynamically coupling the mini-disks to
the lump, directly. If the accretion rate makes the ﬂow
optically thick, soft X-ray emission comes from the inner
rim of the circum-binary disk and harder radiation from
the mini disks if also coronal emission is excited (Tang
et al., 2018; d’Ascoli et al., 2018, see Sect. 3). While an
optical-UV chirp might be present in tandem with the GW
emission in the very early phase of the inspiral, due to
Doppler shift induced by the circular motion, near plunge
an overall dimming and loss of periodicity might charac-
terize the emission due to the erosion of each mini disk
by the tidal ﬁeld of the companion black hole, whose size
shrinks down to a few times the innermost stable circu-
lar orbit (Tang et al., 2018; Bowen et al., 2018).
Out-
side thermalized regions and in case of low accretion rates,
coronal emission around the two SMBHs may give rise
to hard X-ray emission. Its modulation might depend on
the orientation of the binary orbital plane relative to the
line of sight, Doppler beaming and gravitational lensing.
At plunge and in the post-merger phase, numerical sim-
ulations demonstrated that an incipient relativistic jet is
launched by the new spinning SMBH, which may spark
gamma-ray emission and afterglow emission in its impact
with the ISM (Gold et al., 2014).
Advance localization of the binary by LISA weeks to
months prior to merger to a few square degrees on the sky
(Kocsis et al., 2008; Lang and Hughes, 2008; McWilliams
et al., 2011) will enable a measurement of this EM chirp by
wide-ﬁeld X-ray (and possibly also optical) instruments.
A comparison of the phases of the GW and EM chirp
signals will help break degeneracies between system pa-
rameters, and probe a fractional diﬀerence ∆v in the
propagation speed of photons and gravitons as low as
∆v/c ≈10−17 (Haiman, 2017).
In order to explore to what extent LISA-EM synergies
might be feasible, we consider here few selected cases, with
masses ranging from 105 M⊙to 107 M⊙, out to z = 7, as
listed in Table 4.
For the sake of the discussion, we make the following
simple assumptions:
1. the merging binary emits either at its Eddington limit
(LEdd) or at 10 per cent of this value (0.1LEdd)19.
19Despite
observed
AGN
have
average
luminosity
of
about
0.1LEdd, we expect SMBHBs to form following major mergers, which
are also known to trigger copious gas inﬂows in the remnant nu-
cleus. Hydrodynamical simulations of SMBHB evolution in galaxy
mergers show that the amount of gas bound to the binary can sus-
tain Eddington-limited accretion throughout the merger process (e.g.
Dotti et al., 2009; Capelo et al., 2015), which justiﬁes our choice of
exploring also the LEdd case (cf right panel of Fig. 8).
For the two cases, the bolometric luminosity is L =
1.4 × 1044M6 erg s−1 and L = 1.4 × 1043M6 erg s−1,
respectively, where M6 = M/106 M⊙;
2. at these values of luminosity, ≈10 per cent of the emis-
sion is in the 2 −10 keV band (Lusso et al., 2012);
3. a generic 1.5 bolometric correction for observations in
optical/infrared;
4. a radio luminosity based on the triggering of a pow-
erful radio jet of Ljet ≈1043M6 erg s−1 at GHz fre-
quencies (regardless of the assumed Eddington ratio
of point 1).
These assumptions translate in the observables detailed in
Table 4. Absorption is not considered in the X-ray ﬂuxes
estimates reported in Table 4 while, as discussed above
(see Sect. 1.2), galaxies in their advanced stage of merg-
ing are substantially obscured. However, we note that at
high redshift (z = 3, 5, 7) obscuration, with typical value of
NH=1023 cm−2, will not aﬀect the hard X-ray (2–10 keV)
ﬂux estimates, while at z = 1 the estimated ﬂux will de-
crease by about 10 per cent. We refer the reader to Sect. 5
of Tamanini et al. (2016) for further discussion about the
modelling of the emission and the conversion into magni-
tudes and ﬂuxes. We also stress that the emission models
are very simpliﬁed and numbers in Table 4 are indicative.
For relatively massive sources at z ≤3 (ﬁrst three rows
in Table 4) LISA might provide the sky location of the
source with ∆Ω< 0.4 deg2 at merger, a less than 10
per cent precision on the luminosity distance measurement
(mostly limited by weak lensing), plus intrinsic source pa-
rameters such mass and mass ratio to better than 1 per
cent, and the spin parameters of the two BHs to a 0.01−0.1
absolute precision (Klein et al., 2016). Depending on the
exact low-frequency performance of LISA, these systems
might enter in band months before coalescence, allowing
pre-merger identiﬁcation and localisation (although with
a much worse precision of several deg2). For a LISA band
entry frequency of f < 0.1 mHz, the orbital period is
several minutes. Note that both a 107M⊙system emit-
ting at 0.1LEdd and an Eddington limited 106M⊙binary
at z ≤1 have an apparent magnitude of mv ≈23.5,
within the capabilities of LSST. The LISA error-box can
therefore be covered periodically by LSST in the attempt
to identify a varying source matching the orbital period
(Haiman, 2017), as discussed in Sect. 4.3. Note that at
those small magnitudes a lot of transient optical signals
are expected; matching a ﬂux periodic variation to the
(extremely well measured by LISA) frequency evolution of
the binary might provide the key to discern the true GW
source from other contaminants.
An arcsec sky localization precision during the late inspi-
ral phase will allow to point any instrument in any band
to obtain multi-wavelength coverage of the source, trac-
ing its evolution as it proceeds to merger. This scenario
would yield an unprecedented wealth of information about
merging SMBHBs, allowing a time-dependent tracing of
the emission at all wavelength, thus probing the interac-
48
Table 4: Emission properties of selected GW sources observed by LISA. Besides the source mass and redshift, reported are the 1-σ relative
error in the luminosity distance measurement, ∆DL/DL, and the sky localization region ∆Ωat merger, deﬁned such that the probability
of ﬁnding the source within this region is 1 −e−1 ≈0.63 (Barack and Cutler, 2004). As for the EM emission, 10 per cent Eddington and
Eddington-limited emission are assumed. The visual magnitude, mv, has been obtained by applying a bolometric correction BC= 1.5, the
X-ray ﬂux assumes 10 per cent of the bolometric luminosity in the 2 −10 keV band with a power-law distribution with slope Γ =1.7. The
radio ﬂux density is based on the jet emission model of Meier (2001). Numbers should only be considered indicative as neither extinction nor
absorption have been applied. See text in Sect. 7.1 for details
0.1LEdd
LEdd
Mass
redshift
∆DL/DL
∆Ω
mv
X-ray ﬂux
mv
X-ray ﬂux
Radio ﬂux
[M⊙]
[deg2]
[erg s−1cm−2]
[erg s−1cm−2]
[µJy]
107
1
0.05
0.3
23.5
3.2 × 10−15
21
3.2 × 10−14
2 × 104
106
1
0.01
0.1
26
3.2 × 10−16
23.5
3.2 × 10−15
2 × 103
106
3
0.04
0.4
28.9
2.6 × 10−17
26.5
2.6 × 10−16
135
106
5
0.07
2
30.3
8 × 10−18
27.8
8 × 10−17
38
105
5
0.1
5
32.5
8 × 10−19
30
8 × 10−18
3.8
105
7
0.1
10
33.5
4 × 10−19
31
4 × 10−18
1.7
tion between the binary and the surrounding gas after dy-
namical decoupling (see, e.g., Tang et al., 2018; Bowen
et al., 2018). Observations at multiple scales will probe
the host of such system, providing unprecedented infor-
mation about the physical environment of merging binary
hosts at large. The emission properties of the system can
be used to construct a consistent model that can be re-
scaled to search for the much more abundant population
of wider binaries (Haiman et al., 2009) – thus not emitting
in the LISA band – in, e.g., LSST data.
As we move to higher redshifts, observations become
more complicated. Beyond z = 1, identifying a periodic
pre-merger counterpart with LSST will be unfeasible, be-
cause even an Eddington-limited binary is simply too dim.
Moreover, LISA parameters will not be so sharply deter-
mined, mostly because of the lower S/N and relative larger
error in luminosity distance, which ramps up to 10 per
cent, also because of weak lensing.
Combined with the
intrinsic low ﬂux of such a high-redshift source, this will
make EM identiﬁcation problematic.
Eddington-limited
systems with M ∼> 106M⊙will still be within the nom-
inal limiting ﬂux of Athena up to z ≈5, and to z ≈3
the sky localization might still be good enough to fall
within a single WFI FoV. Thus Athena can be pointed
after merger, searching for a distinctive X-ray afterglow,
maybe associated to the launch of a jet or to a post-
merger re-brightening of the source. At even lower masses
(≈105M⊙) and higher redshifts, the best chance of ﬁnd-
ing an EM counterpart will be the identiﬁcation of a µJy
transient with SKA, than might be associated with the
emergence of a transient radio jet at merger (Palenzuela
et al., 2010; Kaplan et al., 2011). SKA will have a unique
combination of sensitivity and large ﬁeld of view (see Ta-
ble 2 in Sect. 5.1). Its sub-arcsec angular resolution will
make follow up observation possible in all bands, charac-
terizing the source and its environment. Detection of sev-
eral such events will give invaluable insights on the high-
redshift assembly of SMBHs in connection to their hosts
(Sesana et al., 2011a).
7.2. PTAs: giants in the low-redshift Universe
A GW propagating into space aﬀects the travel time
of photons, an eﬀect that is measurable in very precise
cosmic clocks like millisecond pulsars. The typical magni-
tude of the eﬀect on the pulse time of arrival (ToAs) is of
the order δt ≈h/(2πf) (where f is the GW frequency),
which for an SMBH binary of 109M⊙at 500 Mpc distance
with an orbital period of a year gives ≈10 ns (Sesana and
Vecchio, 2010). Several PTA projects around the world
are monitoring O(100) millisecond pulsars, some of them
to better than 100 ns accuracy (Desvignes et al., 2016;
Reardon et al., 2016; Verbiest et al., 2016; Arzoumanian
et al., 2018). The correlation of ToAs from multiple pul-
sars eﬀectively increases the sensitivity of this technique,
which is now starting to probe the interesting region of
the astrophysical parameter space where SMBH binaries
are expected to reside (Middleton et al., 2018). In the long
run, the SKA will likely boost current PTAs sensitivity by
more than an order of magnitude (Janssen et al., 2015).
The primary target of PTA campaigns is the cosmic
population of centi-pc separation SMBH binaries with
M > 108M⊙at z < 1 (Sesana et al., 2008), emitting in the
nHz frequency band (i.e. with orbital periods from decades
to months). Crucially, this implies that PTAs and time-
domain surveys will be targeting the same sources, opening
synergies that can work in both directions.
EM to PTA. The ﬁrst thing to notice is that sensitivity
of EM probes is not a problem for typical PTA sources.
A M = 109M⊙system at z = 1 will be, for example,
well within reach of single pointings with both LSST and
eROSITA. Assuming emission at 0.1LEdd, and neglecting
obscuration, the ﬂux in the 2–10 keV and 0.5-2 keV energy
band would be 3 and 1.8 ×10−13 erg s−1cm−2, respectively
(adopting the same assumptions about the X-ray spectrum
shape as in the previous section). We know that the soft
X-ray band is aﬀected by absorption and AGN residing in
galaxies in advanced merger stage are often substantially
obscured (see Sect. 1.2). A better avenue would therefore
be to observe in the 2–10 keV band, which is less aﬀected
49
by obscuration. In-fact, assuming an intrinsic column den-
sity NH = 1023cm−2 (Ricci et al., 2017; De Rosa et al.,
2018), the X-ray ﬂux for the aforementioned binary de-
creases to 2.8 and 0.2 ×10−13 erg s−1cm−2 in 2–10 keV
and 0.5–2 keV, respectively. This is still above the single-
point ﬂux limit of eROSITA in both the hard and soft-X
ray bands in 4 years all-sky survey (eRASS:4, see Sect. 5.2)
and marginal within the average value expected at the end
of the one-year all sky survey (eRASS:1). In general, all
sky time-domain surveys will generate a large amount of
candidates that can be veriﬁed or dismissed by PTA ob-
servations. As already mentioned, this particular line of
research has already been implemented on speciﬁc SMBH
binary candidate samples (Sesana et al., 2018), casting
doubts about their nature. Besides allowing veriﬁcation
of the individual brightest candidates, PTAs will also pro-
vide a strong consistency check of the overall population
statistics.
A high S/N detection of the stochastic GW
background and of its spatial anisotropies (although on
large scales only) can be cross-correlated with the popula-
tion of SMBH binary candidates identiﬁed in EM surveys,
to see whether they match or not. In turn, this can provide
strong constrains on the fraction of accreting SMBH bina-
ries at z < 1, and thus on their typical environment. For
example, a majority of the GW background unaccounted
for by EM candidates will be an indication that massive
low-redshift binaries preferentially evolve in gas-poor en-
vironments, being mostly driven by stellar dynamics.
PTA to EM. Although the incoherent sum of all the
sources will create a stochastic GW background, several
individual sources will be eventually singled out from the
signal, some with S/N> 10. Those will mostly be systems
with M > 109M⊙at z < 0.5 (Rosado et al., 2015; Kel-
ley et al., 2019c), for which PTAs will provide a relatively
poor sky localization within ≲100 deg2. Although this
ﬁgure seems discouraging, two things should be borne in
mind. First, those are extremely massive systems at rela-
tively low redshift; if they are active they are bound to be
extremely bright (unlike the case of LISA sources). Sec-
ond, they will necessarily reside in very massive galaxies,
limiting the number of likely hosts to < 1000 even over
such a large region of the sky (Goldstein et al., 2019). Pe-
riodic coverage of the relevant sky region in optical, radio
and X-rays, will allow to scrutinize all potential brightest
hosts, as the GW emission is stationary or slowly chirp-
ing.
Again, if no convincing variable AGN is seen, one
can conﬁdently say either that the system is severely sub-
Eddington or that the AGN does not have a periodically
variable signature at that given explored wavelength and
timescales. On the other hand, a conﬁdent detection of a
periodic source matching the GW period will allow deep
follow-ups at all wavelengths.
Identiﬁcation of the host
will also break the mass-distance degeneracy in equation
(4), allowing a 10 per cent estimate of the source chirp
mass. High resolution integral ﬁeld spectroscopy will al-
low to probe the environment of the source from Mpc to
sub-kpc scales, providing a wealth of information about
the interplay of the binary with its host at diﬀerent scales.
Periodicity and variability at all wavelengths, spectroscopy
of broad emission lines (including, possibly, Kα lines) will
permit a detailed characterization of the accretion ﬂow
onto the SMBH binary and the eﬃciency of the emission
processes at play, that can be used to test our theoretical
models of SMBH binary-disk interaction.
Part IV
Concluding remarks
We reviewed the multi-faceted astrophysics of dual and
binary AGN systems, and discussed topics that emerged
in the meeting held at the Lorentz Center in Leiden “The
Quest for Multiple Supermassive Black Holes: A Multi-
Messenger View”. Dual and binary AGN are rare and of-
ten obscured sources. Their discovery and their modeling
is complex but their importance is overarching, as the as-
trophysics ruling the formation of dual AGN encompasses
many scales and diﬀerent cosmic environments. This re-
quires on the one hand costly, multiband and coordinated
follow-ups in order to ﬁrmly establish the presence of mul-
tiple AGN systems on all scales and on the other hand
multi-scale theoretical models, bridging the AU scale of
accretion disks with the Mpc scales of cosmic structures.
Within our broader community, judging the reliability
and/or the signiﬁcance of an observational (or even a the-
oretical) result is often diﬃcult because of the limited
knowledge of the methodology used by groups working in
diﬀerent ﬁelds. The aim of this review is to provide a com-
prehensive summary of results and techniques adopted by
diﬀerent groups working in this ﬁeld, with focus on obser-
vations, theory, and numerical simulations.
While there is a rich literature on the topic, systematic
searches of binary/dual SMBHs, or studies of their candi-
date hosts are rare. The future missions in diﬀerent energy
domains, from radio to X-rays, will increase the number of
candidate dual AGN systems by orders of magnitude due
to enhanced resolution and sensitivity.
Simultaneously,
the combination of all surveys (e.g., optical/NIR or MIR)
available in the near future will allow to ﬁlter out the “real”
dual AGN from the false positives.
Current state-of-the-art cosmological simulations of
galaxy evolution and simulations of isolated galaxy merg-
ers provide important tools for the interpretation of ob-
servations and allow us to detect the presence of dual,
obscured AGN systems. In particular, cosmological sim-
ulations suggest that dual AGN activity is not a unique
tracer of galaxy mergers, since many inactive SMBH pairs
at kpc-scale separations exist.
Although isolated merger simulations typically reach a
higher resolution compared to the coarser-grained cosmo-
logical simulations, dust obscuration from the torus in the
vicinity of the SMBHs is not resolved yet. This might lead
50
to an over-estimate of the lifetime of dual AGN, if inferred
from observations in the X-rays. Future higher resolution
and improved subgrid recipes need to be developed in or-
der to describe the behavior of these systems.
We then provided an overview on the current theoretical
understanding of the orbital decay of SMBHBs from the
hundred pc to sub-pc scale.
Several physical processes
can cause the evolution of SMBH pairs to stall in this
regime of separations. Such systems would be detectable
as single/dual AGN, if fed individually (on the larger scale)
or if surrounded by a circumbinary disk which feeds the
two SMBHs through mini-disks. A quantity of interest for
observations is the characteristic residency time which, on
these scales, is of order of ∼10 Myrs or less, yet suﬃciently
extended to enable detection.
At the time of writing, there are few hundred pc and
sub-pc scale SMBHB candidates described in the litera-
ture but their nature as true binaries is inconclusive and
remains to be tested through time-domain and contin-
ued multi-wavelength monitoring. The new photometric
(e.g., ZTF, LSST and others) and spectroscopic searches
(e.g., SDSS-V) promise to provide even longer baselines
and larger datasets of AGN which can be used to search
for binary signatures – a crucial advancement given the
low incidence of sub-pc SMBHBs expected from theory.
Combined with a growing sophistication of simulations of
gravitationally bound binaries and improved theoretical
predictions for EM and GW signatures, this bodes well
for future detections of SMBHBs.
In the next decades,
GW observatories, such as LISA and PTAs, will provide
ﬁrst direct evidence of binary and merging high-z SMBHs,
and of a GW foreground of inspiralling SMBHBs at z ∼1.
These prospected observations will open a new chapter in
studies of binary and dual SMBHBs.
8. Acknowledgments
All authors acknowledge the hospitality of the Lorentz
Center for international workshops (Leiden, The Nether-
lands), where the idea of this work was born, and ac-
knowledge the support of the International Space Science
Institute (ISSI Bern, Switzerland), where the collabora-
tion was originated. We thank the reviewers for having
provided valuable and constructive comments that im-
proved the clarity of the manuscript, and J.E. Barnes,
L. Blecha, M. Eracleous, B.D. Farris, H. Fu, X. Liu, R.
Pfeiﬂe, L.C. Popovic, C. Ricci, S. Rodriguez, S. Tang, G.
B. Taylor for their kind permission to reuse ﬁgures from
their publications. ADR, CV and SB acknowledge ﬁnan-
cial support from ASI under grant ASI-INAF I/037/12/0,
and from the agreement ASI-INAF n. 2017-14-H.O. TB
acknowledges support by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration under Grant No.
NNX15AK84G
and 80NSSC19K0319 issued through the Astrophysics
Theory Program and by the Research Corporation for
Science Advancement through a Cottrell Scholar Award.
SF and KÉG thank the Hungarian National Research,
Development, and Innovation Oﬃce (OTKA NN110333)
for support.
KÉG was supported by the János Bolyai
Research Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sci-
ences and by the ÚNKP-19-4 New National Excellence
Program of the Ministry for Innovation and Technology.
BH acknowledges ﬁnancial support by the DFG grant
GE625/17-1. EL is supported by a European Union CO-
FUND/Durham Junior Research Fellowship (under EU
grant agreement no.
609412).
DL acknowledges sup-
port from the European Research Council (ERC) under
grant 647208 (PI Jonker). AS is supported by the ERC
CoG grant 818691 (B Massive). MGi is supported by the
“Programa de Atracción de Talento” of the Comunidad de
Madrid grant 2018-T1/TIC-11733 for the project: “Un-
veiling Black Hole Winds from Space”, and by the Span-
ish State Research Agency (AEI) grant MDM-2017-0737
Unidad de Excelencia “María de Maeztu” - Centro de As-
trobiología (INTA-CSIC). PRC and LM acknowledge sup-
port from the Swiss National Science Foundation under
the Grant 200020_178949.
MC acknowledges support
from the National Science Foundation (NSF) NANOGrav
Physics Frontier Center, award number 1430284.
NHR
acknowledges support from the BMBF Verbundforschung
under FKZ: 05A17PC1 and FKZ: 05A17PC2.
ZH ac-
knowledges support from NASA grants NNX17AL82G
and 80NSSC19K0149 and NSF grant 1715661.
KI ac-
knowledges support by the Spanish MINECO under grant
AYA2016-76012-C3-1-P and MDM-2014-0369 of ICCUB
(Unidad de Excelencia ’María de Maeztu’). MPT acknowl-
edges ﬁnancial support from the Spanish MCIU through
the “Center of Excellence Severo Ochoa” award for the In-
stituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía (SEV-2017-0709) and
through the MINECO grants AYA2012-38491-C02-02 and
AYA2015-63939-C2-1-P.
51
References
Abazajian, K. N., Adelman-McCarthy, J. K., Agüeros, M. A., Allam,
S. S., Allende Prieto, C., An, D., Anderson, K. S. J., Anderson,
S. F., Annis, J., Bahcall, N. A., et al., Jun. 2009. The Seventh
Data Release of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. ApJS 182, 543–
558.
Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Abernathy, M. R., Acer-
nese, F., Ackley, K., Adams, C., Adams, T., Addesso, P., Adhikari,
R. X., et al., Oct. 2016. Binary Black Hole Mergers in the First
Advanced LIGO Observing Run. Physical Review X 6 (4), 041015.
Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Acernese, F., Ackley,
K., Adams, C., Adams, T., Addesso, P., Adhikari, R. X., Adya,
V. B., et al., Oct. 2017a. GW170817: Observation of Gravitational
Waves from a Binary Neutron Star Inspiral. Physical Review Let-
ters 119 (16), 161101.
Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Acernese, F., Ackley, K.,
Adams, C., Adams, T., Addesso, P., Adhikari, R. X., Adya, V. B.,
et al., Oct. 2017b. Multi-messenger Observations of a Binary Neu-
tron Star Merger. ApJ 848, L12.
Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Albert, A., Atwood, W. B., Baldini, L.,
Ballet, J., Barbiellini, G., Bastieri, D., Becerra Gonzalez, J., Bel-
lazzini, R., Bissaldi, E., Blandford, R. D., Bloom, E. D., Bonino,
R., Bottacini, E., Bregeon, J., Bruel, P., Buehler, R., Buson, S.,
Caliandro, G. A., Cameron, R. A., Caputo, R., Caragiulo, M.,
Caraveo, P. A., Cavazzuti, E., Cecchi, C., Chekhtman, A., Chi-
ang, J., Chiaro, G., Ciprini, S., Cohen-Tanugi, J., Conrad, J., Cu-
tini, S., D’Ammando, F., de Angelis, A., de Palma, F., Desiante,
R., Di Venere, L., Domínguez, A., Drell, P. S., Favuzzi, C., Fegan,
S. J., Ferrara, E. C., Focke, W. B., Fuhrmann, L., Fukazawa, Y.,
Fusco, P., Gargano, F., Gasparrini, D., Giglietto, N., Giommi, P.,
Giordano, F., Giroletti, M., Godfrey, G., Green, D., Grenier, I. A.,
Grove, J. E., Guiriec, S., Harding, A. K., Hays, E., Hewitt, J. W.,
Hill, A. B., Horan, D., Jogler, T., Jóhannesson, G., Johnson, A. S.,
Kamae, T., Kuss, M., Larsson, S., Latronico, L., Li, J., Li, L.,
Longo, F., Loparco, F., Lott, B., Lovellette, M. N., Lubrano, P.,
Magill, J., Maldera, S., Manfreda, A., Max-Moerbeck, W., Mayer,
M., Mazziotta, M. N., McEnery, J. E., Michelson, P. F., Mizuno,
T., Monzani, M. E., Morselli, A., Moskalenko, I. V., Murgia, S.,
Nuss, E., Ohno, M., Ohsugi, T., Ojha, R., Omodei, N., Orlando,
E., Ormes, J. F., Paneque, D., Pearson, T. J., Perkins, J. S., Perri,
M., Pesce-Rollins, M., Petrosian, V., Piron, F., Pivato, G., Porter,
T. A., Rainò, S., Rando, R., Razzano, M., Readhead, A., Reimer,
A., Reimer, O., Schulz, A., Sgrò, C., Siskind, E. J., Spada, F.,
Spandre, G., Spinelli, P., Suson, D. J., Takahashi, H., Thayer,
J. B., Thompson, D. J., Tibaldo, L., Torres, D. F., Tosti, G.,
Troja, E., Uchiyama, Y., Vianello, G., Wood, K. S., Wood, M.,
Zimmer, S., Berdyugin, A., Corbet, R. H. D., Hovatta, T., Lind-
fors, E., Nilsson, K., Reinthal, R., Sillanpää, A., Stamerra, A.,
Takalo, L. O., Valtonen, M. J., Nov. 2015. Multiwavelength Ev-
idence for Quasi-periodic Modulation in the Gamma-Ray Blazar
PG 1553+113. ApJ 813, L41.
Agudo, I., Marscher, A. P., Jorstad, S. G., Gómez, J. L., Perucho,
M., Piner, B. G., Rioja, M., Dodson, R., Mar. 2012. Erratic Jet
Wobbling in the BL Lacertae Object OJ287 Revealed by Sixteen
Years of 7 mm VLBA Observations. ApJ 747, 63.
Ahn, C. P., Alexandroﬀ, R., Allende Prieto, C., Anderson, S. F., An-
derton, T., Andrews, B. H., Aubourg, É., Bailey, S., Balbinot, E.,
Barnes, R., et al., Dec. 2012. The Ninth Data Release of the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey: First Spectroscopic Data from the SDSS-III
Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey. ApJS 203, 21.
Aldering, G., Adam, G., Antilogus, P., Astier, P., Bacon, R., Bon-
gard, S., Bonnaud, C., Copin, Y., Hardin, D., Henault, F., Howell,
D. A., Lemonnier, J.-P., Levy, J.-M., Loken, S. C., Nugent, P. E.,
Pain, R., Pecontal, A., Pecontal, E., Perlmutter, S., Quimby,
R. M., Schahmaneche, K., Smadja, G., Wood-Vasey, W. M., Dec.
2002. Overview of the Nearby Supernova Factory. In: Tyson, J. A.,
Wolﬀ, S. (Eds.), Survey and Other Telescope Technologies and
Discoveries. Vol. 4836 of Proc. SPIE . pp. 61–72.
Alexander, D. M., Hickox, R. C., Jun. 2012. What drives the growth
of black holes? New A Rev. 56, 93–121.
Amaro-Seoane, P., Audley, H., Babak, S., Baker, J., Barausse, E.,
Bender, P., Berti, E., Binetruy, P., Born, M., Bortoluzzi, D.,
Camp, J., Caprini, C., Cardoso, V., Colpi, M., Conklin, J., Cor-
nish, N., Cutler, C., Danzmann, K., Dolesi, R., Ferraioli, L., Fer-
roni, V., Fitzsimons, E., Gair, J., Gesa Bote, L., Giardini, D.,
Gibert, F., Grimani, C., Halloin, H., Heinzel, G., Hertog, T.,
Hewitson, M., Holley-Bockelmann, K., Hollington, D., Hueller,
M., Inchauspe, H., Jetzer, P., Karnesis, N., Killow, C., Klein,
A., Klipstein, B., Korsakova, N., Larson, S. L., Livas, J., Lloro,
I., Man, N., Mance, D., Martino, J., Mateos, I., McKenzie, K.,
McWilliams, S. T., Miller, C., Mueller, G., Nardini, G., Nele-
mans, G., Nofrarias, M., Petiteau, A., Pivato, P., Plagnol, E.,
Porter, E., Reiche, J., Robertson, D., Robertson, N., Rossi, E.,
Russano, G., Schutz, B., Sesana, A., Shoemaker, D., Slutsky, J.,
Sopuerta, C. F., Sumner, T., Tamanini, N., Thorpe, I., Troebs,
M., Vallisneri, M., Vecchio, A., Vetrugno, D., Vitale, S., Volon-
teri, M., Wanner, G., Ward, H., Wass, P., Weber, W., Ziemer, J.,
Zweifel, P., Feb. 2017. Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. arXiv
e-prints.
An, T., Mohan, P., Frey, S., Oct. 2018. VLBI Studies of DAGN and
SMBHB Hosting Galaxies. Radio Science 53, 1211–1217.
Anninos, P., Fragile, P. C., Olivier, S. S., Hoﬀman, R., Mishra, B.,
Camarda, K., Sep. 2018. Relativistic Tidal Disruption and Nuclear
Ignition of White Dwarf Stars by Intermediate-mass Black Holes.
ApJ 865, 3.
Armitage, P. J., Jan 2007. Lecture notes on the formation and early
evolution of planetary systems. arXiv e-prints, astro–ph/0701485.
Armitage, P. J., Natarajan, P., Mar 2002. Accretion during the
Merger of Supermassive Black Holes. ApJ 567 (1), L9–L12.
Armitage, P. J., Natarajan, P., Dec. 2005. Eccentricity of Supermas-
sive Black Hole Binaries Coalescing from Gas-rich Mergers. ApJ
634, 921–927.
Armus, L., Mazzarella, J. M., Evans, A. S., Surace, J. A., Sanders,
D. B., Iwasawa, K., Frayer, D. T., Howell, J. H., Chan, B., Pet-
ric, A., Vavilkin, T., Kim, D. C., Haan, S., Inami, H., Murphy,
E. J., Appleton, P. N., Barnes, J. E., Bothun, G., Bridge, C. R.,
Charmandaris, V., Jensen, J. B., Kewley, L. J., Lord, S., Madore,
B. F., Marshall, J. A., Melbourne, J. E., Rich, J., Satyapal, S.,
Schulz, B., Spoon, H. W. W., Sturm, E., U, V., Veilleux, S., Xu,
K., Jun. 2009. GOALS: The Great Observatories All-Sky LIRG
Survey. PASP 121, 559.
Arrigoni Battaia, F., Hennawi, J. F., Prochaska, J. X., Oñorbe, J.,
Farina, E. P., Cantalupo, S., Lusso, E., Jan. 2019. QSO MUSEUM
I: a sample of 61 extended Ly α-emission nebulae surrounding z
∼3 quasars. MNRAS 482, 3162–3205.
Arrigoni Battaia, F., Prochaska, J. X., Hennawi, J. F., Obreja, A.,
Buck, T., Cantalupo, S., Dutton, A. A., Macciò, A. V., Jan. 2018.
Inspiraling halo accretion mapped in Ly α emission around a z∼3
quasar. MNRAS 473, 3907–3940.
Artymowicz, P., Lubow, S. H., Feb. 1994. Dynamics of binary-disk
interaction. 1: Resonances and disk gap sizes. ApJ 421, 651–667.
Arzoumanian, Z., Brazier, A., Burke-Spolaor, S., Chamberlin, S.,
Chatterjee, S., Christy, B., Cordes, J. M., Cornish, N. J., Craw-
ford, F., Thankful Cromartie, H., Crowter, K., DeCesar, M. E.,
Demorest, P. B., Dolch, T., Ellis, J. A., Ferdman, R. D., Ferrara,
E. C., Fonseca, E., Garver-Daniels, N., Gentile, P. A., Halmrast,
D., Huerta, E. A., Jenet, F. A., Jessup, C., Jones, G., Jones,
M. L., Kaplan, D. L., Lam, M. T., Lazio, T. J. W., Levin, L.,
Lommen, A., Lorimer, D. R., Luo, J., Lynch, R. S., Madison, D.,
Matthews, A. M., McLaughlin, M. A., McWilliams, S. T., Min-
garelli, C., Ng, C., Nice, D. J., Pennucci, T. T., Ransom, S. M.,
Ray, P. S., Siemens, X., Simon, J., Spiewak, R., Stairs, I. H.,
Stinebring, D. R., Stovall, K., Swiggum, J. K., Taylor, S. R.,
Vallisneri, M., van Haasteren, R., Vigeland, S. J., Zhu, W., The
NANOGrav Collaboration, Apr. 2018. The NANOGrav 11-year
Data Set: High-precision Timing of 45 Millisecond Pulsars. ApJS
235, 37.
Assef, R. J., Stern, D., Kochanek, C. S., Blain, A. W., Brodwin,
M., Brown, M. J. I., Donoso, E., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Jannuzi,
B. T., Jarrett, T. H., Stanford, S. A., Tsai, C. W., Wu, J., Yan,
L., Jul 2013. Mid-infrared Selection of Active Galactic Nuclei with
52
the Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer. II. Properties of WISE-
selected Active Galactic Nuclei in the NDWFS Boötes Field. ApJ
772 (1), 26.
Baldassare, V. F., Reines, A. E., Gallo, E., Greene, J. E., Aug 2015.
A ∼50,000 M⊙Solar Mass Black Hole in the Nucleus of RGG 118.
ApJ 809 (1), L14.
Baldwin, J., Ferland, G., Korista, K., Verner, D., Dec. 1995. Locally
Optimally Emitting Clouds and the Origin of Quasar Emission
Lines. ApJ 455, L119.
Baldwin, J. A., Phillips, M. M., Terlevich, R., Feb. 1981. Classi-
ﬁcation parameters for the emission-line spectra of extragalactic
objects. PASP 93, 5–19.
Ballo, L., Braito, V., Della Ceca, R., Maraschi, L., Tavecchio, F.,
Dadina, M., Jan. 2004. Arp 299: A Second Merging System with
Two Active Nuclei? ApJ 600, 634–639.
Bansal, K., Taylor, G. B., Peck, A. B., Zavala, R. T., Romani, R. W.,
Jul. 2017. Constraining the Orbit of the Supermassive Black Hole
Binary 0402+379. ApJ 843, 14.
Bär, R. E., Weigel, A. K., Sartori, L. F., Oh, K., Koss, M., Schaw-
inski, K., Apr. 2017. Active galactic nuclei from He II: a more
complete census of AGN in SDSS galaxies yields a new population
of low-luminosity AGN in highly star-forming galaxies. MNRAS
466, 2879–2887.
Barack, L., Cardoso, V., Nissanke, S., Sotiriou, T. P., Askar, A.,
Belczynski, K., Bertone, G., Bon, E., Blas, D., Brito, R., Bu-
lik, T., Burrage, C., Byrnes, C. T., Caprini, C., Chernyakova, M.,
Chrusciel, P., Colpi, M., Ferrari, V., Gaggero, D., Gair, J., Garcia-
Bellido, J., Hassan, S. F., Heisenberg, L., Hendry, M., Heng, I. S.,
Herdeiro, C., Hinderer, T., Horesh, A., Kavanagh, B. J., Kocsis,
B., Kramer, M., Le Tiec, A., Mingarelli, C., Nardini, G., Nele-
mans, G., Palenzuela, C., Pani, P., Perego, A., Porter, E. K.,
Rossi, E. M., Schmidt, P., Sesana, A., Sperhake, U., Stamerra,
A., Stein, L. C., Tamanini, N., Tauris, T. M., Urena-Lopez, L. A.,
Vincent, F., Volonteri, M., Wardell, B., Wex, N., Yagi, K., Ab-
delsalhin, T., Aloy, M. A., Amaro-Seoane, P., Annulli, L., Arca-
Sedda, M., Bah, I., Barausse, E., Barakovic, E., Benkel, R., Ben-
nett, C. L., Bernard, L., Bernuzzi, S., Berry, C. P. L., Berti,
E., Bezares, M., Juan Blanco-Pillado, J., Blazquez-Salcedo, J. L.,
Bonetti, M., Boskovic, M., Bosnjak, Z., Bricman, K., Bruegmann,
B., Capelo, P. R., Carloni, S., Cerda-Duran, P., Charmousis, C.,
Chaty, S., Clerici, A., Coates, A., Colleoni, M., Collodel, L. G.,
Compere, G., Cook, W., Cordero-Carrion, I., Correia, M., de la
Cruz-Dombriz, A., Czinner, V. G., Destounis, K., Dialektopou-
los, K., Doneva, D., Dotti, M., Drew, A., Eckner, C., Edholm, J.,
Emparan, R., Erdem, R., Ferreira, M., Ferreira, P. G., Finch, A.,
Font, J. A., Franchini, N., Fransen, K., Gal’tsov, D., Ganguly, A.,
Gerosa, D., Glampedakis, K., Gomboc, A., Goobar, A., Gualtieri,
L., Guendelman, E., Haardt, F., Harmark, T., Hejda, F., Hertog,
T., Hopper, S., Husa, S., Ihanec, N., Ikeda, T., Jaodand, A., Jet-
zer Xisco Jimenez-Forteza, P., Kamionkowski, M., Kaplan, D. E.,
Kazantzidis, S., Kimura, M., Kobayashi, S., Kokkotas, K., Krolik,
J., Kunz, J., Lammerzahl, C., Lasky, P., Lemos, J. P. S., Levi
Said, J., Liberati, S., Lopes, J., Luna, R., Ma, Y.-Z., Maggio,
E., Martinez Montero, M., Maselli, A., Mayer, L., Mazumdar, A.,
Messenger, C., Menard, B., Minamitsuji, M., Moore, C. J., Mota,
D., Nampalliwar, S., Nerozzi, A., Nichols, D., Nissimov, E., Ober-
gaulinger, M., Obers, N. A., Oliveri, R., Pappas, G., Pasic, V.,
Peiris, H., Petrushevska, T., Pollney, D., Pratten, G., Rakic, N.,
Racz, I., Radia, M., Ramazanouglu, F. M., Ramos-Buades, A.,
Raposo, G., Rosca-Mead, R., Rogatko, M., Rosinska, D., Ross-
wog, S., Ruiz Morales, E., Sakellariadou, M., Sanchis-Gual, N.,
Sharan Salaﬁa, O., Samajdar, A., Sintes, A., Smole, M., Sop-
uerta, C., Souza-Lima, R., Stalevski, M., Stergioulas, N., Stevens,
C., Tamfal, T., Torres-Forne, A., Tsygankov, S., Unluturk, K.,
Valiante, R., van de Meent, M., Velhinho, J., Verbin, Y., Verc-
nocke, B., Vernieri, D., Vicente, R., Vitagliano, V., Weltman, A.,
Whiting, B., Williamson, A., Witek, H., Wojnar, A., Yakut, K.,
Yan, H., Yazadjiev, S., Zaharijas, G., Zilhao, M., Jul 2019. Black
holes, gravitational waves and fundamental physics: a roadmap.
Classical and Quantum Gravity 36 (14), 143001.
Barack, L., Cutler, C., Apr. 2004. LISA capture sources: Approxi-
mate waveforms, signal-to-noise ratios, and parameter estimation
accuracy. Phys. Rev. D 69 (8), 082005.
Barnes, J. E., Jul. 1992. Transformations of galaxies. I - Mergers of
equal-mass stellar disks. ApJ 393, 484–507.
Barnes, J. E., Jul. 2002. Formation of gas discs in merging galaxies.
MNRAS 333, 481–494.
Barnes, J. E., Hernquist, L., Nov. 1996. Transformations of Galaxies.
II. Gasdynamics in Merging Disk Galaxies. ApJ 471, 115.
Barnes, J. E., Hernquist, L. E., Apr. 1991. Fueling starburst galaxies
with gas-rich mergers. ApJ 370, L65–L68.
Barrows, R. S., Sandberg Lacy, C. H., Kenneﬁck, J., Comerford,
J. M., Kenneﬁck, D., Berrier, J. C., Jun. 2013. Identiﬁcation of
Outﬂows and Candidate Dual Active Galactic Nuclei in SDSS
Quasars at z = 0.8-1.6. ApJ 769, 95.
Barrows, R. S., Stern, D., Madsen, K., Harrison, F., Assef, R. J.,
Comerford, J. M., Cushing, M. C., Fassnacht, C. D., Gonzalez,
A. H., Griﬃth, R., Hickox, R., Kirkpatrick, J. D., Lagattuta,
D. J., Jan. 2012. A Candidate Dual Active Galactic Nucleus at
z = 1.175. ApJ 744, 7.
Barth, A. J., Bennert, V. N., Canalizo, G., Filippenko, A. V., Gates,
E. L., Greene, J. E., Li, W., Malkan, M. A., Pancoast, A., Sand,
D. J., Stern, D., Treu, T., Woo, J.-H., Assef, R. J., Bae, H.-
J., Brewer, B. J., Cenko, S. B., Clubb, K. I., Cooper, M. C.,
Diamond-Stanic, A. M., Hiner, K. D., Hönig, S. F., Hsiao, E.,
Kandrashoﬀ, M. T., Lazarova, M. S., Nierenberg, A. M., Rex,
J., Silverman, J. M., Tollerud, E. J., Walsh, J. L., Apr. 2015. The
Lick AGN Monitoring Project 2011: Spectroscopic Campaign and
Emission-line Light Curves. ApJS 217, 26.
Barth, A. J., Stern, D., May 2018. No Evidence of Periodic Variabil-
ity in the Light Curve of Active Galaxy J0045+41. ApJ 859 (1),
10.
Beckmann, R. S., Slyz, A., Devriendt, J., Jul 2018. Bondi or not
Bondi: the impact of resolution on accretion and drag force mod-
elling for supermassive black holes. MNRAS 478 (1), 995–1016.
Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D., Rees, M. J., Sep. 1980. Massive
black hole binaries in active galactic nuclei. Nature 287, 307–309.
Begelman, M. C., Volonteri, M., Rees, M. J., Jul 2006. Formation of
supermassive black holes by direct collapse in pre-galactic haloes.
MNRAS 370 (1), 289–298.
Bellovary, J. M., Cleary, C. E., Munshi, F., Tremmel, M., Chris-
tensen, C. R., Brooks, A., Quinn, T. R., Jan. 2019. Multimessen-
ger signatures of massive black holes in dwarf galaxies. MNRAS
482, 2913–2923.
Bellovary, J. M., Governato, F., Quinn, T. R., Wadsley, J., Shen, S.,
Volonteri, M., Oct. 2010. Wandering Black Holes in Bright Disk
Galaxy Halos. ApJ 721, L148–L152.
Benítez, E., Méndez-Abreu, J., Fuentes-Carrera, I., Cruz-González,
I., Martínez, B., López-Martin, L., Jiménez-Bailón, E., León-
Tavares, J., Chavushyan, V. H., Jan. 2013. Characterization of
a Sample of Intermediate-type AGNs. I. Spectroscopic Properties
and Serendipitous Discovery of New Dual AGNs. ApJ 763, 36.
Bentz, M. C., Peterson, B. M., Netzer, H., Pogge, R. W., Vester-
gaard, M., May 2009. The Radius-Luminosity Relationship for
Active Galactic Nuclei: The Eﬀect of Host-Galaxy Starlight on
Luminosity Measurements. II. The Full Sample of Reverberation-
Mapped AGNs. ApJ 697, 160–181.
Berczik, P., Merritt, D., Spurzem, R., Bischof, H.-P., May 2006.
Eﬃcient Merger of Binary Supermassive Black Holes in Nonax-
isymmetric Galaxies. ApJ 642, L21–L24.
Bianchi, S., Chiaberge, M., Piconcelli, E., Guainazzi, M., Matt, G.,
May 2008. Chandra unveils a binary active galactic nucleus in Mrk
463. MNRAS 386, 105–110.
Biava, N., Colpi, M., Capelo, P. R., Bonetti, M., Volonteri, M., Tam-
fal, T., Mayer, L., Sesana, A., Aug 2019. The lifetime of binary
black holes in Sérsic galaxy models. MNRAS 487 (4), 4985–4994.
Biernacki, P., Teyssier, R., Bleuler, A., Jul. 2017. On the dynamics
of supermassive black holes in gas-rich, star-forming galaxies: the
case for nuclear star cluster co-evolution. MNRAS 469, 295–313.
Blaes, O., Lee, M. H., Socrates, A., Oct 2002. The Kozai Mecha-
nism and the Evolution of Binary Supermassive Black Holes. ApJ
578 (2), 775–786.
53
Blanton, M. R., Lin, H., Lupton, R. H., Maley, F. M., Young, N.,
Zehavi, I., Loveday, J., Apr. 2003. An Eﬃcient Targeting Strat-
egy for Multiobject Spectrograph Surveys: the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey “Tiling” Algorithm. AJ 125, 2276–2286.
Blecha, L., Cox, T. J., Loeb, A., Hernquist, L., Apr 2011. Recoiling
black holes in merging galaxies: relationship to active galactic
nucleus lifetimes, starbursts and the MBH-σ∗relation. MNRAS
412 (4), 2154–2182.
Blecha, L., Loeb, A., Narayan, R., Mar. 2013. Double-peaked narrow-
line signatures of dual supermassive black holes in galaxy merger
simulations. MNRAS 429, 2594–2616.
Blecha, L., Sijacki, D., Kelley, L. Z., Torrey, P., Vogelsberger, M.,
Nelson, D., Springel, V., Snyder, G., Hernquist, L., Feb. 2016.
Recoiling black holes: prospects for detection and implications of
spin alignment. MNRAS 456, 961–989.
Blecha, L., Snyder, G. F., Satyapal, S., Ellison, S. L., Aug. 2018. The
power of infrared AGN selection in mergers: a theoretical study.
MNRAS 478, 3056–3071.
Blumenthal, K. A., Barnes, J. E., Sep. 2018. Go with the Flow:
Understanding inﬂow mechanisms in galaxy collisions. MNRAS
479, 3952–3965.
Bogdanović, T., 2015. Supermassive Black Hole Binaries: The Search
Continues. In: Sopuerta, C. F. (Ed.), Gravitational Wave Astro-
physics. Vol. 40 of Astrophysics and Space Science Proceedings.
p. 103.
Bogdanović, T., Bode, T., Haas, R., Laguna, P., Shoemaker, D., May
2011. Properties of accretion ﬂows around coalescing supermassive
black holes. Classical and Quantum Gravity 28 (9), 094020.
Bogdanović, T., Smith, B. D., Sigurdsson, S., Eracleous, M., Feb.
2008. Modeling of Emission Signatures of Massive Black Hole Bi-
naries. I. Methods. ApJS 174, 455–480.
Boller, T., Freyberg, M. J., Trümper, J., Haberl, F., Voges, W.,
Nandra, K., Apr. 2016. Second ROSAT all-sky survey (2RXS)
source catalogue. A&A 588, A103.
Bon, E., Zucker, S., Netzer, H., Marziani, P., Bon, N., Jovanović, P.,
Shapovalova, A. I., Komossa, S., Gaskell, C. M., Popović, L. Č.,
Britzen, S., Chavushyan, V. H., Burenkov, A. N., Sergeev, S., La
Mura, G., Valdés, J. R., Stalevski, M., Aug. 2016. Evidence for
Periodicity in 43 year-long Monitoring of NGC 5548. ApJS 225,
29.
Bondi, M., Pérez-Torres, M.-A., May 2010. VLBI Detection of an
Active Galactic Nucleus Pair in the Binary Black Hole Candidate
SDSS J1536+0441. Astrophysical Journal Letters 714, L271–L274.
Bondi, M., Pérez-Torres, M. A., Piconcelli, E., Fu, H., Apr. 2016.
Unveiling the radio counterparts of two binary AGN candidates:
J1108+0659 and J1131-0204. A&A 588, A102.
Bonetti, M., Sesana, A., Barausse, E., Haardt, F., Jun. 2018. Post-
Newtonian evolution of massive black hole triplets in galactic nu-
clei - III. A robust lower limit to the nHz stochastic background
of gravitational waves. MNRAS 477, 2599–2612.
Bonetti, M., Sesana, A., Haardt, F., Barausse, E., Colpi, M., Jul
2019. Post-Newtonian evolution of massive black hole triplets in
galactic nuclei - IV. Implications for LISA. MNRAS 486 (3), 4044–
4060.
Borisova, E., Cantalupo, S., Lilly, S. J., Marino, R. A., Gallego,
S. G., Bacon, R., Blaizot, J., Bouché, N., Brinchmann, J., Carollo,
C. M., Caruana, J., Finley, H., Herenz, E. C., Richard, J., Schaye,
J., Straka, L. A., Turner, M. L., Urrutia, T., Verhamme, A.,
Wisotzki, L., Nov. 2016. Ubiquitous Giant Lyα Nebulae around
the Brightest Quasars at z∼3.5 Revealed with MUSE. ApJ 831,
39.
Boroson, T. A., Lauer, T. R., Mar. 2009. A candidate sub-parsec
supermassive binary black hole system. Nature 458, 53–55.
Bovy, J., Hennawi, J. F., Hogg, D. W., Myers, A. D., Kirkpatrick,
J. A., Schlegel, D. J., Ross, N. P., Sheldon, E. S., McGreer, I. D.,
Schneider, D. P., Weaver, B. A., Mar. 2011. Think Outside the
Color Box: Probabilistic Target Selection and the SDSS-XDQSO
Quasar Targeting Catalog. ApJ 729, 141.
Bovy, J., Myers, A. D., Hennawi, J. F., Hogg, D. W., McMahon,
R. G., Schiminovich, D., Sheldon, E. S., Brinkmann, J., Schnei-
der, D. P., Weaver, B. A., Apr. 2012. Photometric Redshifts
and Quasar Probabilities from a Single, Data-driven Generative
Model. ApJ 749, 41.
Bowen, D. B., Mewes, V., Campanelli, M., Noble, S. C., Krolik, J. H.,
Zilhão, M., Jan. 2018. Quasi-periodic Behavior of Mini-disks in
Binary Black Holes Approaching Merger. ApJ 853, L17.
Bowen, D. B., Mewes, V., Noble, S. C., Avara, M., Campanelli, M.,
Krolik, J. H., Jul 2019. Quasi-periodicity of Supermassive Binary
Black Hole Accretion Approaching Merger. ApJ 879 (2), 76.
Britzen, S., Fendt, C., Witzel, G., Qian, S.-J., Pashchenko, I. N.,
Kurtanidze, O., Zajacek, M., Martinez, G., Karas, V., Aller,
M., Aller, H., Eckart, A., Nilsson, K., Arévalo, P., Cuadra, J.,
Subroweit, M., Witzel, A., Aug. 2018. OJ287: deciphering the
‘Rosetta stone of blazars. MNRAS 478, 3199–3219.
Bundy, K., Bershady, M. A., Law, D. R., Yan, R., Drory, N., Mac-
Donald, N., Wake, D. A., Cherinka, B., Sánchez-Gallego, J. R.,
Weijmans, A.-M., Thomas, D., Tremonti, C., Masters, K., Coc-
cato, L., Diamond-Stanic, A. M., Aragón-Salamanca, A., Avila-
Reese, V., Badenes, C., Falcón-Barroso, J., Belﬁore, F., Bizyaev,
D., Blanc, G. A., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Blanton, M. R., Brown-
stein, J. R., Byler, N., Cappellari, M., Conroy, C., Dutton, A. A.,
Emsellem, E., Etherington, J., Frinchaboy, P. M., Fu, H., Gunn,
J. E., Harding, P., Johnston, E. J., Kauﬀmann, G., Kinemuchi,
K., Klaene, M. A., Knapen, J. H., Leauthaud, A., Li, C., Lin,
L., Maiolino, R., Malanushenko, V., Malanushenko, E., Mao, S.,
Maraston, C., McDermid, R. M., Merriﬁeld, M. R., Nichol, R. C.,
Oravetz, D., Pan, K., Parejko, J. K., Sanchez, S. F., Schlegel, D.,
Simmons, A., Steele, O., Steinmetz, M., Thanjavur, K., Thomp-
son, B. A., Tinker, J. L., van den Bosch, R. C. E., Westfall,
K. B., Wilkinson, D., Wright, S., Xiao, T., Zhang, K., Jan.
2015. Overview of the SDSS-IV MaNGA Survey: Mapping nearby
Galaxies at Apache Point Observatory. ApJ 798, 7.
Burke-Spolaor, S., Feb. 2011. A radio Census of binary supermassive
black holes. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
410, 2113–2122.
Burke-Spolaor, S., Blecha, L., Bogdanovic, T., Comerford, J. M.,
Lazio, T. J. W., Liu, X., Maccarone, T. J., Pesce, D., Shen, Y.,
Taylor, G., Aug. 2018. The Next-Generation Very Large Array:
Supermassive Black Hole Pairs and Binaries. arXiv e-prints.
Burke-Spolaor, S., Brazier, A., Chatterjee, S., Comerford, J., Cordes,
J., Lazio, T. J. W., Liu, X., Shen, Y., Feb. 2014. A hunt for dual
radio active galactic nuclei in the VLASS. arXiv e-prints.
Cai, Z., Fan, X., Yang, Y., Bian, F., Prochaska, J. X., Zabludoﬀ,
A., McGreer, I., Zheng, Z.-Y., Green, R., Cantalupo, S., Frye,
B., Hamden, E., Jiang, L., Kashikawa, N., Wang, R., Mar. 2017.
Discovery of an Enormous Lyα Nebula in a Massive Galaxy Over-
density at z = 2.3. ApJ 837, 71.
Callegari, S., Kazantzidis, S., Mayer, L., Colpi, M., Bellovary, J. M.,
Quinn, T., Wadsley, J., Mar. 2011. Growing Massive Black Hole
Pairs in Minor Mergers of Disk Galaxies. ApJ 729, 85.
Callegari, S., Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Colpi, M., Governato, F.,
Quinn, T., Wadsley, J., May 2009. Pairing of Supermassive Black
Holes in Unequal-Mass Galaxy Mergers. ApJ 696, L89–L92.
Campanelli, M., Lousto, C. O., Zlochower, Y., Merritt, D., Jun 2007.
Maximum Gravitational Recoil. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (23), 231102.
Canalizo, G., Max, C., Whysong, D., Antonucci, R., Dahm, S. E.,
Nov. 2003. Adaptive Optics Imaging and Spectroscopy of Cygnus
A. I. Evidence for a Minor Merger. ApJ 597, 823–831.
Cantalupo, S., Arrigoni-Battaia, F., Prochaska, J. X., Hennawi,
J. F., Madau, P., Feb. 2014. A cosmic web ﬁlament revealed in
Lyman-α emission around a luminous high-redshift quasar. Na-
ture 506, 63–66.
Capelo, P. R., Dotti, M., Mar. 2017. Shocks and angular momentum
ﬂips: a diﬀerent path to feeding the nuclear regions of merging
galaxies. MNRAS 465, 2643–2653.
Capelo, P. R., Dotti, M., Volonteri, M., Mayer, L., Bellovary, J. M.,
Shen, S., Aug. 2017. A survey of dual active galactic nuclei in
simulations of galaxy mergers: frequency and properties. MNRAS
469, 4437–4454.
Capelo, P. R., Volonteri, M., Dotti, M., Bellovary, J. M., Mayer, L.,
Governato, F., Mar. 2015. Growth and activity of black holes in
galaxy mergers with varying mass ratios. MNRAS 447, 2123–2143.
54
Cavaliere, A., Tavani, M., Vittorini, V., Feb. 2017. Blazar Jets Per-
turbed by Magneto-gravitational Stresses in Supermassive Bina-
ries. ApJ 836, 220.
Chandrasekhar, S., Mar. 1943. Dynamical Friction. I. General Con-
siderations: the Coeﬃcient of Dynamical Friction. ApJ 97, 255.
Charisi, M., Bartos, I., Haiman, Z., Price-Whelan, A. M., Graham,
M. J., Bellm, E. C., Laher, R. R., Márka, S., Dec. 2016. A popu-
lation of short-period variable quasars from PTF as supermassive
black hole binary candidates. MNRAS 463, 2145–2171.
Charisi, M., Bartos, I., Haiman, Z., Price-Whelan, A. M., Márka, S.,
Nov. 2015. Multiple periods in the variability of the supermassive
black hole binary candidate quasar PG1302-102? MNRAS 454,
L21–L25.
Charisi, M., Haiman, Z., Schiminovich, D., D’Orazio, D. J., Jun.
2018. Testing the relativistic Doppler boost hypothesis for super-
massive black hole binary candidates. MNRAS 476, 4617–4628.
Chen, K., Halpern, J. P., Filippenko, A. V., Apr. 1989. Kinematic
evidence for a relativistic Keplerian disk - ARP 102B. ApJ 339,
742–751.
Cheung, C. C., May 2007. FIRST “Winged” and X-Shaped Radio
Source Candidates. AJ 133 (5), 2097–2121.
Chi, S., Barthel, P. D., Garrett, M. A., Feb. 2013. Deep, wide-ﬁeld,
global VLBI observations of the Hubble deep ﬁeld north (HDF-N)
and ﬂanking ﬁelds (HFF). Astronomy & Astrophysics 550, A68.
Cisternas, M., Jahnke, K., Inskip, K. J., Kartaltepe, J., Koekemoer,
A. M., Lisker, T., Robaina, A. R., Scodeggio, M., Sheth, K.,
Trump, J. R., Andrae, R., Miyaji, T., Jan. 2011. The Bulk of
the Black Hole Growth Since z ˜ 1 Occurs in a Secular Universe:
No Major Merger-AGN Connection. ApJ 726, 57–+.
Civano, F., Elvis, M., Lanzuisi, G., Aldcroft, T., Trichas, M., Bon-
giorno, A., Brusa, M., Blecha, L., Comastri, A., Loeb, A., Sal-
vato, M., Fruscione, A., Koekemoer, A., Komossa, S., Gilli, R.,
Mainieri, V., Piconcelli, E., Vignali, C., Jun. 2012. Chandra High-
resolution observations of CID-42, a Candidate Recoiling Super-
massive Black Hole. ApJ 752, 49.
Civano, F., Elvis, M., Lanzuisi, G., Jahnke, K., Zamorani, G.,
Blecha, L., Bongiorno, A., Brusa, M., Comastri, A., Hao, H.,
Leauthaud, A., Loeb, A., Mainieri, V., Piconcelli, E., Salvato, M.,
Scoville, N., Trump, J., Vignali, C., Aldcroft, T., Bolzonella, M.,
Bressert, E., Finoguenov, A., Fruscione, A., Koekemoer, A. M.,
Cappelluti, N., Fiore, F., Giodini, S., Gilli, R., Impey, C. D., Lilly,
S. J., Lusso, E., Puccetti, S., Silverman, J. D., Aussel, H., Capak,
P., Frayer, D., Le Floch, E., McCracken, H. J., Sanders, D. B.,
Schiminovich, D., Taniguchi, Y., Jul. 2010. A Runaway Black Hole
in COSMOS: Gravitational Wave or Slingshot Recoil? ApJ 717,
209–222.
Coil, A. L., Aird, J., Reddy, N., Shapley, A. E., Kriek, M., Siana,
B., Mobasher, B., Freeman, W. R., Price, S. H., Shivaei, I., Mar.
2015. The MOSDEF Survey: Optical Active Galactic Nucleus Di-
agnostics at z∼2.3. ApJ 801, 35.
Cole, D. R., Dehnen, W., Read, J. I., Wilkinson, M. I., Oct. 2012.
The mass distribution of the Fornax dSph: constraints from its
globular cluster distribution. MNRAS 426, 601–613.
Colpi, M., Sep. 2014. Massive Binary Black Holes in Galactic Nuclei
and Their Path to Coalescence. Space Sci. Rev. 183, 189–221.
Colpi, M., Holley-Bockelmann, K., Bogdanovic, T., Natarajan, P.,
Bellovary, J., Sesana, A., Tremmel, M., Schnittman, J., Com-
erford, J., Barausse, E., Berti, E., Volonteri, M., Khan, F.,
McWilliams, S., Burke-Spolaor, S., Hazboun, J., Conklin, J.,
Mueller, G., Larson, S., Mar. 2019. Astro2020 science white pa-
per: The gravitational wave view of massive black holes. arXiv
e-prints.
Colpi, M., Sesana, A., 2017. Gravitational Wave Sources in the Era
of Multi-Band Gravitational Wave Astronomy. World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Co, pp. 43–140.
Comerford, J. M., Griﬃth, R. L., Gerke, B. F., Cooper, M. C., New-
man, J. A., Davis, M., Stern, D., Sep. 2009. 1.75 h −1 kpc Separa-
tion Dual Active Galactic Nuclei at z = 0.36 in the Cosmos Field.
ApJ 702, L82–L86.
Comerford, J. M., Pooley, D., Barrows, R. S., Greene, J. E., Zakam-
ska, N. L., Madejski, G. M., Cooper, M. C., Jun 2015. Merger-
driven Fueling of Active Galactic Nuclei:
Six Dual and Oﬀset
AGNs Discovered with Chandra and Hubble Space Telescope Ob-
servations. ApJ 806 (2), 219.
Comerford, J. M., Schluns, K., Greene, J. E., Cool, R. J., Nov 2013.
Dual Supermassive Black Hole Candidates in the AGN and Galaxy
Evolution Survey. ApJ 777 (1), 64.
Condon, J. J., 1992. Radio emission from normal galaxies. Annual
Review of Astronomy & Astrophysics 30, 575–611.
Cotini, S., Ripamonti, E., Caccianiga, A., Colpi, M., Della Ceca,
R., Mapelli, M., Severgnini, P., Segreto, A., May 2013. The
merger fraction of active and inactive galaxies in the local Uni-
verse through an improved non-parametric classiﬁcation. MNRAS
431, 2661–2672.
Cox, T. J., Jonsson, P., Somerville, R. S., Primack, J. R., Dekel,
A., Feb. 2008. The eﬀect of galaxy mass ratio on merger-driven
starbursts. MNRAS 384, 386–409.
Croom, S. M., Lawrence, J. S., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Bryant, J. J.,
Fogarty, L., Richards, S., Goodwin, M., Farrell, T., Miziarski, S.,
Heald, R., Jones, D. H., Lee, S., Colless, M., Brough, S., Hopkins,
A. M., Bauer, A. E., Birchall, M. N., Ellis, S., Horton, A., Leon-
Saval, S., Lewis, G., López-Sánchez, Á. R., Min, S.-S., Trinh, C.,
Trowland, H., Mar. 2012. The Sydney-AAO Multi-object Integral
ﬁeld spectrograph. MNRAS 421, 872–893.
Cuadra, J., Armitage, P. J., Alexander, R. D., Begelman, M. C.,
Mar. 2009a. Massive black hole binary mergers within subparsec
scale gas discs. MNRAS 393, 1423–1432.
Cuadra, J., Armitage, P. J., Alexander, R. D., Begelman, M. C.,
Mar. 2009b. Massive black hole binary mergers within subparsec
scale gas discs. MNRAS 393, 1423–1432.
Dalton, G., Trager, S. C., Abrams, D. C., Carter, D., Bonifacio, P.,
Aguerri, J. A. L., MacIntosh, M., Evans, C., Lewis, I., Navarro, R.,
Agocs, T., Dee, K., Rousset, S., Tosh, I., Middleton, K., Pragt, J.,
Terrett, D., Brock, M., Benn, C., Verheijen, M., Cano Infantes, D.,
Bevil, C., Steele, I., Mottram, C., Bates, S., Gribbin, F. J., Rey,
J., Rodriguez, L. F., Delgado, J. M., Guinouard, I., Walton, N.,
Irwin, M. J., Jagourel, P., Stuik, R., Gerlofsma, G., Roelfsma, R.,
Skillen, I., Ridings, A., Balcells, M., Daban, J.-B., Gouvret, C.,
Venema, L., Girard, P., Sep. 2012. WEAVE: the next generation
wide-ﬁeld spectroscopy facility for the William Herschel Telescope.
In: Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy
IV. Vol. 8446 of Proc. SPIE . p. 84460P.
d’Ascoli, S., Noble, S. C., Bowen, D. B., Campanelli, M., Krolik,
J. H., Mewes, V., Oct 2018. Electromagnetic Emission from Su-
permassive Binary Black Holes Approaching Merger. ApJ 865 (2),
140.
Davé, R., Thompson, R., Hopkins, P. F., Nov. 2016. MUFASA:
galaxy formation simulations with meshless hydrodynamics. MN-
RAS 462, 3265–3284.
Davies, R. L., Kewley, L. J., Ho, I.-T., Dopita, M. A., Nov. 2014.
Starburst-AGN mixing - II. Optically selected active galaxies.
MNRAS 444, 3961–3974.
De Rosa, A., Vignali, C., Husemann, B., Bianchi, S., Bogdanović, T.,
Guainazzi, M., Herrero-Illana, R., Komossa, S., Kun, E., Loiseau,
N., Paragi, Z., Perez-Torres, M., Piconcelli, E., Oct. 2018. Dis-
closing the properties of low-redshift dual AGN through XMM-
Newton and SDSS spectroscopy. MNRAS 480, 1639–1655.
Deane, R. P., Paragi, Z., Jarvis, M. J., Coriat, M., Bernardi, G.,
Fender, R. P., Frey, S., Heywood, I., Klöckner, H.-R., Grainge,
K., Rumsey, C., Jul. 2014. A close-pair binary in a distant triple
supermassive black hole system. Nature 511, 57–60.
Debuhr, J., Quataert, E., Ma, C.-P., Hopkins, P., Jul. 2010. Self-
regulated black hole growth via momentum deposition in galaxy
merger simulations. MNRAS 406, L55–L59.
Decarli, R., Dotti, M., Fumagalli, M., Tsalmantza, P., Montuori, C.,
Lusso, E., Hogg, D. W., Prochaska, J. X., Aug. 2013. The nature
of massive black hole binary candidates - I. Spectral properties
and evolution. MNRAS 433, 1492–1504.
Decarli, R., Dotti, M., Montuori, C., Liimets, T., Ederoclite, A., Sep.
2010. The Peculiar Optical Spectrum of 4C+22.25: Imprint of a
Massive Black Hole Binary? ApJ 720, L93–L96.
del Valle, L., Escala, A., Maureira-Fredes, C., Molina, J., Cuadra,
55
J., Amaro-Seoane, P., Sep. 2015. Supermassive Black Holes in a
Star-forming Gaseous Circumnuclear Disk. ApJ 811, 59.
Denney, K. D., Peterson, B. M., Pogge, R. W., Adair, A., Atlee,
D. W., Au-Yong, K., Bentz, M. C., Bird, J. C., Brokofsky, D. J.,
Chisholm, E., Comins, M. L., Dietrich, M., Doroshenko, V. T.,
Eastman, J. D., Eﬁmov, Y. S., Ewald, S., Ferbey, S., Gaskell,
C. M., Hedrick, C. H., Jackson, K., Klimanov, S. A., Klimek,
E. S., Kruse, A. K., Ladéroute, A., Lamb, J. B., Leighly, K.,
Minezaki, T., Nazarov, S. V., Onken, C. A., Petersen, E. A., Pe-
terson, P., Poindexter, S., Sakata, Y., Schlesinger, K. J., Sergeev,
S. G., Skolski, N., Stieglitz, L., Tobin, J. J., Unterborn, C., Vester-
gaard, M., Watkins, A. E., Watson, L. C., Yoshii, Y., Sep. 2010.
Reverberation Mapping Measurements of Black Hole Masses in
Six Local Seyfert Galaxies. ApJ 721, 715–737.
Desvignes, G., Caballero, R. N., Lentati, L., Verbiest, J. P. W.,
Champion, D. J., Stappers, B. W., Janssen, G. H., Lazarus, P.,
Osłowski, S., Babak, S., Bassa, C. G., Brem, P., Burgay, M., Cog-
nard, I., Gair, J. R., Graikou, E., Guillemot, L., Hessels, J. W. T.,
Jessner, A., Jordan, C., Karuppusamy, R., Kramer, M., Lassus,
A., Lazaridis, K., Lee, K. J., Liu, K., Lyne, A. G., McKee, J.,
Mingarelli, C. M. F., Perrodin, D., Petiteau, A., Possenti, A.,
Purver, M. B., Rosado, P. A., Sanidas, S., Sesana, A., Shaiful-
lah, G., Smits, R., Taylor, S. R., Theureau, G., Tiburzi, C., van
Haasteren, R., Vecchio, A., May 2016. High-precision timing of
42 millisecond pulsars with the European Pulsar Timing Array.
MNRAS 458, 3341–3380.
Dewdney, P. E., Hall, P. J., Schilizzi, R. T., Lazio, T. J. L. W.,
Aug. 2009. The Square Kilometre Array. IEEE Proceedings 97,
1482–1496.
Dey, L., Gopakumar, A., Valtonen, M., Zola, S., Susobhanan, A.,
Hudec, R., Pihajoki, P., Pursimo, T., Berdyugin, A., Piirola, V.,
Ciprini, S., Nilsson, K., Jermak, H., Kidger, M., Komossa, S.,
May 2019. The Unique Blazar OJ 287 and Its Massive Binary
Black Hole Central Engine. Universe 5 (5), 108.
Di Cintio, A., Tremmel, M., Governato, F., Pontzen, A., Zavala,
J., Bastidas Fry, A., Brooks, A., Vogelsberger, M., Aug. 2017.
A rumble in the dark: signatures of self-interacting dark matter
in supermassive black hole dynamics and galaxy density proﬁles.
MNRAS 469, 2845–2854.
Di Matteo, T., Springel, V., Hernquist, L., Feb. 2005. Energy input
from quasars regulates the growth and activity of black holes and
their host galaxies. Nature 433, 604–607.
Dietrich, M., Peterson, B. M., Albrecht, P., Altmann, M., Barth,
A. J., Bennie, P. J., Bertram, R., Bochkarev, N. G., Bock, H.,
Braun, J. M., Burenkov, A., Collier, S., Fang, L.-Z., Francis,
O. P., Filippenko, A. V., Foltz, C. B., Gässler, W., Gaskell,
C. M., Geﬀert, M., Ghosh, K. K., Hilditch, R. W., Honeycutt,
R. K., Horne, K., Huchra, J. P., Kaspi, S., Kümmel, M., Leighly,
K. M., Leonard, D. C., Malkov, Y. F., Mikhailov, V., Miller,
H. R., Morrill, A. C., Noble, J., O’Brien, P. T., Oswalt, T. D.,
Pebley, S. P., Pfeiﬀer, M., Pronik, V. I., Qian, B.-C., Robertson,
J. W., Robinson, A., Rumstay, K. S., Schmoll, J., Sergeev, S. G.,
Sergeeva, E. A., Shapovalova, A. I., Skillman, D. R., Snedden,
S. A., Soundararajaperumal, S., Stirpe, G. M., Tao, J., Turner,
G. W., Wagner, R. M., Wagner, S. J., Wei, J. Y., Wu, H., Zheng,
W., Zou, Z. L., Apr. 1998. Steps toward Determination of the Size
and Structure of the Broad-Line Region in Active Galactic Nuclei.
XII. Ground-based Monitoring of 3C 390.3. ApJS 115, 185–202.
DiPompeo, M. A., Bovy, J., Myers, A. D., Lang, D., Sep. 2015.
Quasar probabilities and redshifts from WISE mid-IR through
GALEX UV photometry. MNRAS 452, 3124–3138.
Djorgovski, S. G., Courbin, F., Meylan, G., Sluse, D., Thompson,
D., Mahabal, A., Glikman, E., Jun. 2007. Discovery of a Probable
Physical Triple Quasar. ApJ 662, L1–L5.
Dolag, K., Mevius, E., Remus, R.-S., Aug. 2017. Distribution and
Evolution of Metals in the Magneticum Simulations. Galaxies 5,
35.
Donley, J. L., Rieke, G. H., Pérez-González, P. G., Rigby, J. R.,
Alonso-Herrero, A., May 2007. Spitzer Power-Law Active Galac-
tic Nucleus Candidates in the Chandra Deep Field-North. ApJ
660 (1), 167–190.
D’Orazio, D. J., Di Stefano, R., Mar. 2018. Periodic self-lensing from
accreting massive black hole binaries. MNRAS 474, 2975–2986.
D’Orazio, D. J., Haiman, Z., Sep 2017. Lighthouse in the dust: in-
frared echoes of periodic emission from massive black hole binaries.
MNRAS 470 (1), 1198–1217.
D’Orazio, D. J., Haiman, Z., Duﬀell, P., MacFadyen, A., Farris, B.,
Jul. 2016. A transition in circumbinary accretion discs at a binary
mass ratio of 1:25. MNRAS 459, 2379–2393.
D’Orazio, D. J., Haiman, Z., MacFadyen, A., Dec. 2013. Accretion
into the central cavity of a circumbinary disc. MNRAS 436, 2997–
3020.
D’Orazio, D. J., Haiman, Z., Schiminovich, D., Sep. 2015. Relativis-
tic boost as the cause of periodicity in a massive black-hole binary
candidate. Nature 525, 351–353.
Dorn-Wallenstein, T., Levesque, E. M., Ruan, J. J., Nov. 2017. A
Mote in Andromeda’s Disk: A Misidentiﬁed Periodic AGN behind
M31. ApJ 850, 86.
Dotti, M., Colpi, M., Haardt, F., Mar. 2006. Laser Interferometer
Space Antenna double black holes: dynamics in gaseous nuclear
discs. MNRAS 367, 103–112.
Dotti, M., Colpi, M., Haardt, F., Mayer, L., Aug. 2007. Supermas-
sive black hole binaries in gaseous and stellar circumnuclear discs:
orbital dynamics and gas accretion. MNRAS 379, 956–962.
Dotti, M., Ruszkowski, M., Paredi, L., Colpi, M., Volonteri, M.,
Haardt, F., Jul. 2009. Dual black holes in merger remnants - I.
Linking accretion to dynamics. MNRAS 396, 1640–1646.
Downes, D., Solomon, P. M., Nov 1998. Rotating Nuclear Rings and
Extreme Starbursts in Ultraluminous Galaxies. ApJ 507 (2), 615–
654.
Dubois, Y., Devriendt, J., Slyz, A., Teyssier, R., Mar 2012. Self-
regulated growth of supermassive black holes by a dual jet-heating
active galactic nucleus feedback mechanism: methods, tests and
implications for cosmological simulations. MNRAS 420 (3), 2662–
2683.
Dubois, Y., Pichon, C., Welker, C., Le Borgne, D., Devriendt, J.,
Laigle, C., Codis, S., Pogosyan, D., Arnouts, S., Benabed, K.,
Bertin, E., Blaizot, J., Bouchet, F., Cardoso, J. F., Colombi, S.,
de Lapparent, V., Desjacques, V., Gavazzi, R., Kassin, S., Kimm,
T., McCracken, H., Milliard, B., Peirani, S., Prunet, S., Rouberol,
S., Silk, J., Slyz, A., Sousbie, T., Teyssier, R., Tresse, L., Treyer,
M., Vibert, D., Volonteri, M., Oct 2014. Dancing in the dark:
galactic properties trace spin swings along the cosmic web. MN-
RAS 444 (2), 1453–1468.
Duﬀell, P. C., Haiman, Z., MacFadyen, A. I., D’Orazio, D. J., Farris,
B. D., Sep. 2014. The Migration of Gap-opening Planets is Not
Locked to Viscous Disk Evolution. ApJ 792, L10.
Dürmann, C., Kley, W., Feb. 2017. The accretion of migrating giant
planets. A&A 598, A80.
Eftekharzadeh, S., Myers, A. D., Hennawi, J. F., Djorgovski, S. G.,
Richards, G. T., Mahabal, A. A., Graham, M. J., Jun. 2017. Clus-
tering on very small scales from a large sample of conﬁrmed quasar
pairs: does quasar clustering track from Mpc to kpc scales? MN-
RAS 468, 77–90.
Eftekharzadeh, S., Myers, A. D., Kourkchi, E., Jun 2019. A Halo
Occupation Interpretation of Quasars at z ∼1.5 Using Very Small-
Scale Clustering Information. MNRAS 486 (1), 274–282.
Ellison, S. L., Patton, D. R., Hickox, R. C., Jul 2015. Galaxy pairs
in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey - XII. The fuelling mechanism of
low-excitation radio-loud AGN. MNRAS 451, L35–L39.
Ellison, S. L., Patton, D. R., Mendel, J. T., Scudder, J. M., Dec.
2011. Galaxy pairs in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey - IV. Interac-
tions trigger active galactic nuclei. MNRAS 418, 2043–2053.
Ellison, S. L., Secrest, N. J., Mendel, J. T., Satyapal, S., Simard, L.,
Sep. 2017. Discovery of a dual active galactic nucleus with 8 kpc
separation. MNRAS 470, L49–L53.
Eracleous, M., Boroson, T. A., Halpern, J. P., Liu, J., Aug. 2012.
A Large Systematic Search for Close Supermassive Binary and
Rapidly Recoiling Black Holes. ApJS 201, 23.
Eracleous, M., Halpern, J. P., Jan. 1994. Doubled-peaked emission
lines in active galactic nuclei. ApJS 90, 1–30.
Eracleous, M., Halpern, J. P., M. Gilbert, A., Newman, J. A., Fil-
56
ippenko, A. V., Nov. 1997. Rejection of the Binary Broad-Line
Region Interpretation of Double-peaked Emission Lines in Three
Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 490, 216–226.
Eracleous, M., Lewis, K. T., Flohic, H. M. L. G., Jul. 2009. Double-
peaked emission lines as a probe of the broad-line regions of active
galactic nuclei. New A Rev. 53, 133–139.
Escala, A., Larson, R. B., Coppi, P. S., Mardones, D., Sep. 2005. The
Role of Gas in the Merging of Massive Black Holes in Galactic
Nuclei. II. Black Hole Merging in a Nuclear Gas Disk. ApJ 630,
152–166.
Fabbiano, G., Wang, J., Elvis, M., Risaliti, G., Sep. 2011. A close
nuclear black-hole pair in the spiral galaxy NGC3393. Nature 477,
431–434.
Fabjan, D., Borgani, S., Tornatore, L., Saro, A., Murante, G., Dolag,
K., Jan. 2010. Simulating the eﬀect of active galactic nuclei feed-
back on the metal enrichment of galaxy clusters. MNRAS 401,
1670–1690.
Fan, L., Han, Y., Nikutta, R., Drouart, G., Knudsen, K. K., Jun
2016. Infrared Spectral Energy Distribution Decomposition of
WISE-selected, Hyperluminous Hot Dust-obscured Galaxies. ApJ
823 (2), 107.
Farina, E. P., Montuori, C., Decarli, R., Fumagalli, M., May 2013.
Caught in the act: discovery of a physical quasar triplet. MNRAS
431, 1019–1025.
Farris, B. D., Duﬀell, P., MacFadyen, A. I., Haiman, Z., Mar. 2014.
Binary Black Hole Accretion from a Circumbinary Disk: Gas Dy-
namics inside the Central Cavity. ApJ 783, 134.
Farris, B. D., Duﬀell, P., MacFadyen, A. I., Haiman, Z., Feb. 2015a.
Binary black hole accretion during inspiral and merger. MNRAS
447, L80–L84.
Farris, B. D., Duﬀell, P., MacFadyen, A. I., Haiman, Z., Jan. 2015b.
Characteristic signatures in the thermal emission from accreting
binary black holes. MNRAS 446, L36–L40.
Farris, B. D., Gold, R., Paschalidis, V., Etienne, Z. B., Shapiro,
S. L., Nov. 2012. Binary Black-Hole Mergers in Magnetized Disks:
Simulations in Full General Relativity. Physical Review Letters
109 (22), 221102.
Feltre, A., Charlot, S., Gutkin, J., Mar. 2016. Nuclear activity versus
star formation: emission-line diagnostics at ultraviolet and optical
wavelengths. MNRAS 456, 3354–3374.
Feng, Y., Di-Matteo, T., Croft, R. A., Bird, S., Battaglia, N.,
Wilkins, S., Jan. 2016. The BlueTides simulation: ﬁrst galaxies
and reionization. MNRAS 455, 2778–2791.
Ferland, G. J., Korista, K. T., Verner, D. A., Ferguson, J. W., King-
don, J. B., Verner, E. M., Jul. 1998. CLOUDY 90: Numerical
Simulation of Plasmas and Their Spectra. PASP 110, 761–778.
Ferrarese, L., Merritt, D., Aug. 2000. A Fundamental Relation be-
tween Supermassive Black Holes and Their Host Galaxies. ApJ
539, L9–L12.
Fey, A. L., Gordon, D., Jacobs, C. S., Ma, C., Gaume, R. A., Arias,
E. F., Bianco, G., Boboltz, D. A., Böckmann, S., Bolotin, S.,
Charlot, P., Collioud, A., Engelhardt, G., Gipson, J., Gontier,
A.-M., Heinkelmann, R., Kurdubov, S., Lambert, S., Lytvyn,
S., MacMillan, D. S., Malkin, Z., Nothnagel, A., Ojha, R.,
Skurikhina, E., Sokolova, J., Souchay, J., Sovers, O. J., Tesmer,
V., Titov, O., Wang, G., Zharov, V., Aug. 2015. The Second Re-
alization of the International Celestial Reference Frame by Very
Long Baseline Interferometry. AJ 150, 58.
Fiacconi, D., Mayer, L., Roškar, R., Colpi, M., Nov. 2013. Massive
Black Hole Pairs in Clumpy, Self-gravitating Circumnuclear Disks:
Stochastic Orbital Decay. ApJ 777, L14.
Findlay, J. R., Prochaska, J. X., Hennawi, J. F., Fumagalli, M.,
Myers, A. D., Bartle, S., Chehade, B., DiPompeo, M. A., Shanks,
T., Lau, M. W., Rubin, K. H. R., Jun 2018. Quasars Probing
Quasars. X. The Quasar Pair Spectral Database. ApJS 236 (2),
44.
Foord, A., Gültekin, K., Reynolds, M. T., Hodges-Kluck, E., Cack-
ett, E. M., Comerford, J. M., King, A. L., Miller, J. M., Runnoe,
J. C., May 2019. A Bayesian Analysis of SDSS J0914+0853, a
Low-mass Dual AGN Candidate. ApJ 877 (1), 17.
Foreman, G., Volonteri, M., Dotti, M., Mar. 2009. Double Quasars:
Probes of Black Hole Scaling Relationships and Merger Scenarios.
ApJ 693, 1554–1562.
Förster Schreiber, N. M., Shapley, A. E., Genzel, R., Bouché, N.,
Cresci, G., Davies, R., Erb, D. K., Genel, S., Lutz, D., Newman,
S., Shapiro, K. L., Steidel, C. C., Sternberg, A., Tacconi, L. J.,
Sep. 2011. Constraints on the Assembly and Dynamics of Galaxies.
II. Properties of Kiloparsec-scale Clumps in Rest-frame Optical
Emission of z ˜ 2 Star-forming Galaxies. ApJ 739, 45.
Foster, R. S., Backer, D. C., Sep. 1990. Constructing a pulsar timing
array. ApJ 361, 300–308.
Fragos, T., Lehmer, B., Tremmel, M., Tzanavaris, P., Basu-Zych,
A., Belczynski, K., Hornschemeier, A., Jenkins, L., Kalogera, V.,
Ptak, A., Feb 2013. X-Ray Binary Evolution Across Cosmic Time.
ApJ 764 (1), 41.
French, K. D., Arcavi, I., Zabludoﬀ, A., Feb. 2016. Tidal Disruption
Events Prefer Unusual Host Galaxies. ApJ 818, L21.
Frey, S., Paragi, Z., An, T., Gabányi, K. É., Sep. 2012. Two in
one? A possible dual radio-emitting nucleus in the quasar SDSS
J1425+3231. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
425, 1185–1191.
Fu, H., Yan, L., Myers, A. D., Stockton, A., Djorgovski, S. G., Alder-
ing, G., Rich, J. A., Jan. 2012. The Nature of Double-peaked [O
III] Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 745, 67.
Fu, H., Zhang, Z.-Y., Assef, R. J., Stockton, A., Myers, A. D., Yan,
L., Djorgovski, S. G., Wrobel, J. M., Riechers, D. A., Oct. 2011.
A Kiloparsec-scale Binary Active Galactic Nucleus Conﬁrmed by
the Expanded Very Large Array. Astrophysical Journal Letters
740, L44.
Fumagalli, M., Mackenzie, R., Trayford, J., Theuns, T., Cantalupo,
S., Christensen, L., Fynbo, J. P. U., Møller, P., O’Meara, J.,
Prochaska, J. X., Rafelski, M., Shanks, T., Nov. 2017. Witness-
ing galaxy assembly in an extended z≈3 structure. MNRAS 471,
3686–3698.
Gabányi, K. É., An, T., Frey, S., Komossa, S., Paragi, Z., Hong, X.-
Y., Shen, Z.-Q., Aug. 2016. Four Dual AGN Candidates Observed
with the VLBA. Astrophysical Journal 826, 106.
Gabányi, K. É., Frey, S., Paragi, Z., An, T., Komossa, S., 2017.
Searching for a pair of accreting supermassive black holes in
J1425+3231. In: Gomboc, A. (Ed.), New Frontiers in Black Hole
Astrophysics. Vol. 324 of IAU Symposium. pp. 223–226.
Gabor, J. M., Capelo, P. R., Volonteri, M., Bournaud, F., Bellovary,
J., Governato, F., Quinn, T., Jul. 2016. Comparison of black hole
growth in galaxy mergers with gasoline and ramses. A&A 592,
A62.
Gaskell, C. M., Jun. 1983. Quasars as supermassive binaries. In:
Swings, J.-P. (Ed.), Liege International Astrophysical Colloquia.
Vol. 24 of Liege International Astrophysical Colloquia. pp. 473–
477.
Gaskell, C. M., 1984. Quasars as supermassive binaries. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 422, 349–349.
Gaskell, C. M., 1988. Double peaked broad line proﬁles – edge on
accretion disks or double quasar nuclei? In: Miller, H. R., Wiita,
P. J. (Eds.), Active Galactic Nuclei. Vol. 307 of Lecture Notes in
Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag. p. 61.
Ge, J.-Q., Hu, C., Wang, J.-M., Bai, J.-M., Zhang, S., Aug. 2012.
Double-peaked Narrow Emission-line Galaxies from the Sloan Dig-
ital Sky Survey. I. Sample and Basic Properties. ApJS 201, 31.
Gebhardt, K., Bender, R., Bower, G., Dressler, A., Faber, S. M., Fil-
ippenko, A. V., Green, R., Grillmair, C., Ho, L. C., Kormendy, J.,
Lauer, T. R., Magorrian, J., Pinkney, J., Richstone, D., Tremaine,
S., Aug. 2000. A Relationship between Nuclear Black Hole Mass
and Galaxy Velocity Dispersion. ApJ 539, L13–L16.
George, I. M., Fabian, A. C., Mar. 1991. X-ray reﬂection from cold
matter in active galactic nuclei and X-ray binaries. MNRAS 249,
352–367.
Gerke, B. F., Newman, J. A., Lotz, J., Yan, R., Barmby, P., Coil,
A. L., Conselice, C. J., Ivison, R. J., Lin, L., Koo, D. C., Nandra,
K., Salim, S., Small, T., Weiner, B. J., Cooper, M. C., Davis, M.,
Faber, S. M., Guhathakurta, P., May 2007. The DEEP2 Galaxy
Redshift Survey: AEGIS Observations of a Dual AGN at z = 0.7.
ApJ 660, L23–L26.
57
Gezari, S., Halpern, J. P., Eracleous, M., Apr. 2007. Long-Term Pro-
ﬁle Variability of Double-peaked Emission Lines in Active Galactic
Nuclei. ApJS 169, 167–212.
Giacomazzo, B., Baker, J. G., Miller, M. C., Reynolds, C. S., van
Meter, J. R., Jun. 2012. General Relativistic Simulations of Mag-
netized Plasmas around Merging Supermassive Black Holes. ApJ
752, L15.
Glikman, E., Simmons, B., Mailly, M., Schawinski, K., Urry, C. M.,
Lacy, M., Jun 2015. Major Mergers Host the Most-luminous Red
Quasars at z ~2: A Hubble Space Telescope WFC3/IR Study.
ApJ 806 (2), 218.
Gold, R., Paschalidis, V., Etienne, Z. B., Shapiro, S. L., Pfeiﬀer,
H. P., Mar. 2014. Accretion disks around binary black holes of
unequal mass: General relativistic magnetohydrodynamic simula-
tions near decoupling. Phys. Rev. D 89 (6), 064060.
Goldreich, P., Tremaine, S., Oct. 1980. Disk-satellite interactions.
ApJ 241, 425–441.
Goldstein, J., Veitch, J., Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., Apr. 2018. Null
stream analysis of Pulsar Timing Array data: localisation of re-
solvable gravitational wave sources. MNRAS .
Goldstein, J. M., Sesana, A., Holgado, A. M., Veitch, J., May 2019.
Associating host galaxy candidates to massive black hole binaries
resolved by pulsar timing arrays. MNRAS 485 (1), 248–259.
Goulding, A. D., Greene, J. E., Bezanson, R., Greco, J., Johnson,
S., Leauthaud, A., Matsuoka, Y., Medezinski, E., Price-Whelan,
A. M., Jan. 2018. Galaxy interactions trigger rapid black hole
growth: An unprecedented view from the Hyper Suprime-Cam
survey. PASJ 70, S37.
Gower, A. C., Gregory, P. C., Unruh, W. G., Hutchings, J. B., Nov.
1982. Relativistic precessing jets in quasars and radio galaxies -
Models to ﬁt high resolution data. ApJ 262, 478–496.
Graham, M. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Stern, D., Drake, A. J., Mahabal,
A. A., Donalek, C., Glikman, E., Larson, S., Christensen, E.,
Oct. 2015. A systematic search for close supermassive black hole
binaries in the Catalina Real-time Transient Survey. MNRAS 453,
1562–1576.
Green, P. J., Myers, A. D., Barkhouse, W. A., Aldcroft, T. L.,
Trichas, M., Richards, G. T., Ruiz, Á., Hopkins, P. F., Dec. 2011.
A Multiwavelength Study of Binary Quasars and Their Environ-
ments. ApJ 743, 81.
Green, P. J., Myers, A. D., Barkhouse, W. A., Mulchaey, J. S.,
Bennert, V. N., Cox, T. J., Aldcroft, T. L., Feb. 2010. SDSS
J1254+0846: A Binary Quasar Caught in the Act of Merging.
ApJ 710, 1578–1588.
Greene, J. E., Ho, L. C., Aug 2004. Active Galactic Nuclei with
Candidate Intermediate-Mass Black Holes. ApJ 610 (2), 722–736.
Greene, J. E., Ho, L. C., Nov 2007. A New Sample of Low-Mass
Black Holes in Active Galaxies. ApJ 670 (1), 92–104.
Greene, T. P., Kelly, D. M., Stansberry, J., Leisenring, J., Egami,
E., Schlawin, E., Chu, L., Hodapp, K. W., Rieke, M., Jul. 2017.
λ = 2.4 to 5 µm spectroscopy with the James Webb Space Tele-
scope NIRCam instrument. Journal of Astronomical Telescopes,
Instruments, and Systems 3 (3), 035001.
Grier, C. J., Peterson, B. M., Horne, K., Bentz, M. C., Pogge, R. W.,
Denney, K. D., De Rosa, G., Martini, P., Kochanek, C. S., Zu,
Y., Shappee, B., Siverd, R., Beatty, T. G., Sergeev, S. G., Kaspi,
S., Araya Salvo, C., Bird, J. C., Bord, D. J., Borman, G. A.,
Che, X., Chen, C., Cohen, S. A., Dietrich, M., Doroshenko, V. T.,
Eﬁmov, Y. S., Free, N., Ginsburg, I., Henderson, C. B., King,
A. L., Mogren, K., Molina, M., Mosquera, A. M., Nazarov, S. V.,
Okhmat, D. N., Pejcha, O., Rafter, S., Shields, J. C., Skowron,
J., Szczygiel, D. M., Valluri, M., van Saders, J. L., Feb. 2013. The
Structure of the Broad-line Region in Active Galactic Nuclei. I.
Reconstructed Velocity-delay Maps. ApJ 764, 47.
Gross, A. C., Fu, H., Myers, A. D., Wrobel, J. M., Djorgovski, S. G.,
Sep 2019. X-Ray Properties of Radio-selected Dual Active Galac-
tic Nuclei. ApJ 883 (1), 50.
Guainazzi, M., Piconcelli, E., Jiménez-Bailón, E., Matt, G., Jan.
2005. The early stage of a cosmic collision? XMM-Newton unveils
two obscured AGN in the galaxy pair ESO509-IG066. A&A 429,
L9–L12.
Guedes, J., Callegari, S., Madau, P., Mayer, L., Dec. 2011. Form-
ing Realistic Late-type Spirals in a ΛCDM Universe: The Eris
Simulation. ApJ 742, 76.
Gültekin, K., Miller, J. M., Dec 2012. Observable Consequences of
Merger-driven Gaps and Holes in Black Hole Accretion Disks. ApJ
761 (2), 90.
Günther, R., Kley, W., May 2002. Circumbinary disk evolution.
A&A 387, 550–559.
Guo, H., Liu, X., Shen, Y., Loeb, A., Monroe, T., Prochaska, J. X.,
Jan. 2019. Constraining sub-parsec binary supermassive black
holes in quasars with multi-epoch spectroscopy - III. Candidates
from continued radial velocity tests. MNRAS 482, 3288–3307.
Haiman, Z., Jul. 2017. Electromagnetic chirp of a compact binary
black hole: A phase template for the gravitational wave inspiral.
Phys. Rev. D 96 (2), 023004.
Haiman, Z., Kocsis, B., Menou, K., Aug. 2009. The Population
of Viscosity- and Gravitational Wave-driven Supermassive Black
Hole Binaries Among Luminous Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 700,
1952–1969.
Hainline, K. N., Reines, A. E., Greene, J. E., Stern, D., Dec 2016.
Mid-infrared Colors of Dwarf Galaxies: Young Starbursts Mim-
icking Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 832 (2), 119.
Halpern, J. P., Eracleous, M., Mar. 2000. The End of the Lines for
OX 169: No Binary Broad-Line Region. ApJ 531, 647–653.
Hardee, P. E., Cooper, M. A., Clarke, D. A., Mar. 1994. On jet
response to a driving frequency and the jets in 3C 449. ApJ 424,
126–137.
Hayasaki, K., Feb. 2009. A New Mechanism for Massive Binary
Black-Hole Evolution. PASJ 61, 65–.
Hayasaki, K., Mineshige, S., Sudou, H., Apr. 2007a. Binary Black
Hole Accretion Flows in Merged Galactic Nuclei. PASJ 59, 427–
441.
Hayasaki, K., Mineshige, S., Sudou, H., Apr. 2007b. Binary Black
Hole Accretion Flows in Merged Galactic Nuclei. PASJ 59, 427–
441.
Hayward, C. C., Torrey, P., Springel, V., Hernquist, L., Vogelsberger,
M., Aug. 2014. Galaxy mergers on a moving mesh: a comparison
with smoothed particle hydrodynamics. MNRAS 442, 1992–2016.
Hennawi, J. F., Myers, A. D., Shen, Y., Strauss, M. A., Djorgovski,
S. G., Fan, X., Glikman, E., Mahabal, A., Martin, C. L., Richards,
G. T., Schneider, D. P., Shankar, F., Aug. 2010. Binary Quasars
at High Redshift. I. 24 New Quasar Pairs at z ˜ 3-4. ApJ 719,
1672–1692.
Hennawi, J. F., Prochaska, J. X., Mar. 2013. Quasars Probing
Quasars. IV. Joint Constraints on the Circumgalactic Medium
from Absorption and Emission. ApJ 766, 58.
Hennawi, J. F., Prochaska, J. X., Cantalupo, S., Arrigoni-Battaia,
F., May 2015. Quasar quartet embedded in giant nebula reveals
rare massive structure in distant universe. Science 348, 779–783.
Hennawi, J. F., Strauss, M. A., Oguri, M., Inada, N., Richards, G. T.,
Pindor, B., Schneider, D. P., Becker, R. H., Gregg, M. D., Hall,
P. B., Johnston, D. E., Fan, X., Burles, S., Schlegel, D. J., Gunn,
J. E., Lupton, R. H., Bahcall, N. A., Brunner, R. J., Brinkmann,
J., Jan. 2006. Binary Quasars in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey:
Evidence for Excess Clustering on Small Scales. AJ 131, 1–23.
Hernquist, L., Aug. 1989. Tidal triggering of starbursts and nuclear
activity in galaxies. Nature 340, 687–691.
Hernquist, L., Jun. 1990. An analytical model for spherical galaxies
and bulges. ApJ 356, 359–364.
Herrera Ruiz, N., Middelberg, E., Deller, A., Norris, R. P., Best,
P. N., Brisken, W., Schinnerer, E., Smolčić, V., Delvecchio, I.,
Momjian, E., Bomans, D., Scoville, N. Z., Carilli, C., Nov. 2017.
The faint radio sky: VLBA observations of the COSMOS ﬁeld.
Astronomy & Astrophysics 607, A132.
Herrera Ruiz, N., Middelberg, E., Norris, R. P., Maini, A., May 2016.
Unveiling the origin of the radio emission in radio-quiet quasars.
Astronomy & Astrophysics 589, L2.
Hirschmann, M., Dolag, K., Saro, A., Bachmann, L., Borgani, S.,
Burkert, A., Aug. 2014. Cosmological simulations of black hole
growth: AGN luminosities and downsizing. MNRAS 442, 2304–
2324.
58
Hoﬀman, L., Loeb, A., May 2007. Dynamics of triple black hole sys-
tems in hierarchically merging massive galaxies. MNRAS 377 (3),
957–976.
Holley-Bockelmann, K., Khan, F. M., Sep. 2015. Galaxy Rotation
and Rapid Supermassive Binary Coalescence. ApJ 810, 139.
Holmberg, E., Nov. 1941. On the Clustering Tendencies among the
Nebulae. II. a Study of Encounters Between Laboratory Models
of Stellar Systems by a New Integration Procedure. ApJ 94, 385.
Hopkins, P. F., Hernquist, L., Cox, T. J., Di Matteo, T., Robertson,
B., Springel, V., Mar. 2006. A Uniﬁed, Merger-driven Model of
the Origin of Starbursts, Quasars, the Cosmic X-Ray Background,
Supermassive Black Holes, and Galaxy Spheroids. ApJS 163, 1–
49.
Hopkins, P. F., Quataert, E., Sep. 2010. How do massive black holes
get their gas? MNRAS 407, 1529–1564.
Hopkins, P. F., Quataert, E., Aug. 2011. An analytic model of angu-
lar momentum transport by gravitational torques: from galaxies
to massive black holes. MNRAS 415, 1027–1050.
Hopkins, P. F., Richards, G. T., Hernquist, L., Jan. 2007. An Ob-
servational Determination of the Bolometric Quasar Luminosity
Function. ApJ 654, 731–753.
Hou, M., Liu, X., Guo, H., Li, Z., Shen, Y., Green, P. J., Sep 2019.
Active Galactic Nucleus Pairs from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
III. Chandra X-Ray Observations Unveil Obscured Double Nuclei.
ApJ 882 (1), 41.
Hudson, D. S., Reiprich, T. H., Clarke, T. E., Sarazin, C. L., Jul.
2006. X-ray detection of the proto supermassive binary black hole
at the centre of Abell 400. Astronomy & Astrophysics 453, 433–
446.
Husemann, B., Worseck, G., Arrigoni Battaia, F., Shanks, T., Feb.
2018. Discovery of a dual AGN at z ∼3.3 with 20 kpc separation.
A&A 610, L7.
Imanishi, M., Saito, Y., Jan. 2014. Subaru Adaptive-optics High-
spatial-resolution Infrared K- and L’-band Imaging Search for
Deeply Buried Dual AGNs in Merging Galaxies. ApJ 780, 106.
Ivanov, P. B., Papaloizou, J. C. B., Polnarev, A. G., Jul 1999. The
evolution of a supermassive binary caused by an accretion disc.
MNRAS 307, 79.
Ivezić, Ž., Kahn, S. M., Tyson, J. A., Abel, B., Acosta, E., Allsman,
R., Alonso, D., AlSayyad, Y., Anderson, S. F., Andrew, J., et al.,
May 2008. LSST: from Science Drivers to Reference Design and
Anticipated Data Products. ArXiv e-prints.
Ivezić, Ž., Menou, K., Knapp, G. R., Strauss, M. A., Lupton, R. H.,
Vanden Berk, D. E., Richards, G. T., Tremonti, C., Weinstein,
M. A., Anderson, S., Bahcall, N. A., Becker, R. H., Bernardi, M.,
Blanton, M., Eisenstein, D., Fan, X., Finkbeiner, D., Finlator, K.,
Frieman, J., Gunn, J. E., Hall, P. B., Kim, R. S. J., Kinkhabwala,
A., Narayanan, V. K., Rockosi, C. M., Schlegel, D., Schneider,
D. P., Strateva, I., SubbaRao, M., Thakar, A. R., Voges, W.,
White, R. L., Yanny, B., Brinkmann, J., Doi, M., Fukugita, M.,
Hennessy, G. S., Munn, J. A., Nichol, R. C., York, D. G., Nov.
2002. Optical and Radio Properties of Extragalactic Sources Ob-
served by the FIRST Survey and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
Astronomical Journal 124, 2364–2400.
Iwasawa, K., Sanders, D. B., Teng, S. H., U, V., Armus, L., Evans,
A. S., Howell, J. H., Komossa, S., Mazzarella, J. M., Petric, A. O.,
Surace, J. A., Vavilkin, T., Veilleux, S., Trentham, N., May 2011.
C-GOALS: Chandra observations of a complete sample of lumi-
nous infrared galaxies from the IRAS Revised Bright Galaxy Sur-
vey. A&A 529, A106.
Iwasawa, K., U, V., Mazzarella, J. M., Medling, A. M., Sanders,
D. B., Evans, A. S., Apr. 2018. Testing a double AGN hypothesis
for Mrk 273. A&A 611, A71.
Izumi, T., Kawakatu, N., Kohno, K., Aug. 2016. Do Circumnuclear
Dense Gas Disks Drive Mass Accretion onto Supermassive Black
Holes? ApJ 827, 81.
Janssen, G., Hobbs, G., McLaughlin, M., Bassa, C., Deller, A.,
Kramer, M., Lee, K., Mingarelli, C., Rosado, P., Sanidas, S.,
Sesana, A., Shao, L., Stairs, I., Stappers, B., Verbiest, J. P. W.,
Apr. 2015. Gravitational Wave Astronomy with the SKA. Advanc-
ing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
37.
Jarrett, T. H., Cohen, M., Masci, F., Wright, E., Stern, D., Benford,
D., Blain, A., Carey, S., Cutri, R. M., Eisenhardt, P., Lonsdale,
C., Mainzer, A., Marsh, K., Padgett, D., Petty, S., Ressler, M.,
Skrutskie, M., Stanford, S., Surace, J., Tsai, C. W., Wheelock, S.,
Yan, D. L., Jul. 2011. The Spitzer-WISE Survey of the Ecliptic
Poles. ApJ 735, 112.
Johansson, P. H., Burkert, A., Naab, T., Dec. 2009. The Evolution of
Black Hole Scaling Relations in Galaxy Mergers. ApJ 707, L184–
L189.
Johnston, S., Bailes, M., Bartel, N., Baugh, C., Bietenholz, M.,
Blake, C., Braun, R., Brown, J., Chatterjee, S., Darling, J., Deller,
A., Dodson, R., Edwards, P. G., Ekers, R., Ellingsen, S., Feain, I.,
Gaensler, B. M., Haverkorn, M., Hobbs, G., Hopkins, A., Jackson,
C., James, C., Joncas, G., Kaspi, V., Kilborn, V., Koribalski, B.,
Kothes, R., Landecker, T. L., Lenc, E., Lovell, J., Macquart, J.-P.,
Manchester, R., Matthews, D., McClure-Griﬃths, N. M., Norris,
R., Pen, U.-L., Phillips, C., Power, C., Protheroe, R., Sadler, E.,
Schmidt, B., Stairs, I., Staveley-Smith, L., Stil, J., Taylor, R.,
Tingay, S., Tzioumis, A., Walker, M., Wall, J., Wolleben, M.,
Dec. 2007. Science with the Australian Square Kilometre Array
Pathﬁnder. PASA 24, 174–188.
Ju, W., Greene, J. E., Raﬁkov, R. R., Bickerton, S. J., Badenes, C.,
Nov. 2013. Search for Supermassive Black Hole Binaries in the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey Spectroscopic Sample. ApJ 777, 44.
Jun, H. D., Stern, D., Graham, M. J., Djorgovski, S. G., Mainzer, A.,
Cutri, R. M., Drake, A. J., Mahabal, A. A., Nov. 2015. Infrared
Time Lags for the Periodic Quasar PG 1302-102. ApJ 814, L12.
Kaastra, J. S., Roos, N., Feb. 1992. Massive Binary Black-Holes and
Wiggling Jets. A&A 254, 96.
Kaplan, D. L., O’Shaughnessy, R., Sesana, A., Volonteri, M., Jun.
2011. Blindly Detecting Merging Supermassive Black Holes with
Radio Surveys. ApJ 734, L37.
Kauﬀmann, G., Haehnelt, M., Jan. 2000. A uniﬁed model for the
evolution of galaxies and quasars. MNRAS 311, 576–588.
Kayo, I., Oguri, M., Aug 2012. Very small scale clustering of quasars
from a complete quasar lens survey. MNRAS 424 (2), 1363–1371.
Kelley, L., Charisi, M., Burke-Spolaor, S., Simon, J., Blecha, L.,
Bogdanovic, T., Colpi, M., Comerford, J., D’Orazio, D., Dotti,
M., Eracleous, M., Graham, M., Greene, J., Haiman, Z., Holley-
Bockelmann, K., Kara, E., Kelly, B., Komossa, S., Larson, S., Liu,
X., Ma, C. P., Noble, S., Paschalidis, V., Raﬁkov, R., Ravi, V.,
Runnoe, J., Sesana, A., Stern, D., Strauss, M. A., U, V., Volonteri,
M., The Nanograv Collaboration, May 2019a. Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics With Pulsar Timing Arrays. BAAS 51 (3), 490.
Kelley, L. Z., Blecha, L., Hernquist, L., Jan 2017. Massive black
hole binary mergers in dynamical galactic environments. MNRAS
464 (3), 3131–3157.
Kelley, L. Z., Haiman, Z., Sesana, A., Hernquist, L., May 2019b.
Massive BH binaries as periodically variable AGN. MNRAS
485 (2), 1579–1594.
Kelley, L. Z., Haiman, Z., Sesana, A., Hernquist, L., May 2019c. Mas-
sive BH binaries as periodically variable AGN. MNRAS 485 (2),
1579–1594.
Kelly,
B. J.,
Baker,
J. G.,
Etienne,
Z. B.,
Giacomazzo,
B.,
Schnittman, J., Dec 2017. Prompt electromagnetic transients from
binary black hole mergers. Phys. Rev. D 96 (12), 123003.
Kewley, L. J., Maier, C., Yabe, K., Ohta, K., Akiyama, M., Dopita,
M. A., Yuan, T., Sep. 2013. The Cosmic BPT Diagram: Con-
fronting Theory with Observations. ApJ 774, L10.
Khan, F. M., Berentzen, I., Berczik, P., Just, A., Mayer, L., Nitadori,
K., Callegari, S., Sep. 2012a. Formation and Hardening of Super-
massive Black Hole Binaries in Minor Mergers of Disk Galaxies.
ApJ 756, 30.
Khan, F. M., Capelo, P. R., Mayer, L., Berczik, P., Dec 2018. Dy-
namical Evolution and Merger Timescales of LISA Massive Black
Hole Binaries in Disk Galaxy Mergers. ApJ 868 (2), 97.
Khan, F. M., Holley-Bockelmann, K., Berczik, P., Just, A., Aug.
2013. Supermassive Black Hole Binary Evolution in Axisymmetric
Galaxies: The Final Parsec Problem is Not a Problem. ApJ 773,
100.
59
Khan, F. M., Just, A., Merritt, D., May 2011. Eﬃcient Merger of
Binary Supermassive Black Holes in Merging Galaxies. ApJ 732,
89.
Khan, F. M., Preto, M., Berczik, P., Berentzen, I., Just, A., Spurzem,
R., Apr. 2012b. Mergers of Unequal-mass Galaxies: Supermassive
Black Hole Binary Evolution and Structure of Merger Remnants.
ApJ 749, 147.
Khandai, N., Di Matteo, T., Croft, R., Wilkins, S., Feng, Y., Tucker,
E., DeGraf, C., Liu, M.-S., Jun. 2015. The MassiveBlack-II sim-
ulation: the evolution of haloes and galaxies to z˜0. MNRAS 450,
1349–1374.
Kharb, P., Lal, D. V., Merritt, D., Oct. 2017. A candidate sub-
parsec binary black hole in the Seyfert galaxy NGC 7674. Nature
Astronomy 1, 727–733.
Kim, D.-C., Evans, A. S., Vavilkin, T., Armus, L., Mazzarella, J. M.,
Sheth, K., Surace, J. A., Haan, S., Howell, J. H., Díaz-Santos,
T., Petric, A., Iwasawa, K., Privon, G. C., Sanders, D. B., May
2013. Hubble Space Telescope ACS Imaging of the GOALS Sam-
ple: Quantitative Structural Properties of Nearby Luminous In-
frared Galaxies with LIR > 1011.4 L⊙. ApJ 768, 102.
King, A., Pounds, K., Aug. 2015. Powerful Outﬂows and Feedback
from Active Galactic Nuclei. ARA&A 53, 115–154.
Klein, A., Barausse, E., Sesana, A., Petiteau, A., Berti, E., Babak,
S., Gair, J., Aoudia, S., Hinder, I., Ohme, F., Wardell, B., Jan.
2016. Science with the space-based interferometer eLISA: Super-
massive black hole binaries. Phys. Rev. D 93 (2), 024003.
Kocevski, D. D., Brightman, M., Nandra, K., Koekemoer, A. M.,
Salvato, M., Aird, J., Bell, E. F., Hsu, L.-T., Kartaltepe, J. S.,
Koo, D. C., Lotz, J. M., McIntosh, D. H., Mozena, M., Rosario, D.,
Trump, J. R., Dec. 2015. Are Compton-thick AGNs the Missing
Link between Mergers and Black Hole Growth? ApJ 814, 104.
Kochanek, C. S., Shappee, B. J., Stanek, K. Z., Holoien, T. W.-S.,
Thompson, T. A., Prieto, J. L., Dong, S., Shields, J. V., Will, D.,
Britt, C., Perzanowski, D., Pojmański, G., Oct. 2017. The All-
Sky Automated Survey for Supernovae (ASAS-SN) Light Curve
Server v1.0. PASP 129 (10), 104502.
Kocsis, B., Haiman, Z., Loeb, A., Dec. 2012a. Gas pile-up, gap over-
ﬂow and Type 1.5 migration in circumbinary discs: application to
supermassive black hole binaries. MNRAS 427, 2680–2700.
Kocsis, B., Haiman, Z., Loeb, A., Dec. 2012b. Gas pile-up, gap over-
ﬂow and Type 1.5 migration in circumbinary discs: general theory.
MNRAS 427, 2660–2679.
Kocsis, B., Haiman, Z., Menou, K., Sep. 2008. Premerger Localiza-
tion of Gravitational Wave Standard Sirens with LISA: Triggered
Search for an Electromagnetic Counterpart. ApJ 684, 870–887.
Kollatschny,
W.,
Weilbacher,
P. M.,
Ochmann,
M. W.,
Che-
louche, D., Monreal-Ibero, A., Bacon, R., Contini, T., Oct 2019.
NGC6240: A triple nucleus system in the advanced/ﬁnal state of
merging. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1910.12813.
Kollmeier, J. A., Zasowski, G., Rix, H.-W., Johns, M., Anderson,
S. F., Drory, N., Johnson, J. A., Pogge, R. W., Bird, J. C.,
Blanc, G. A., Brownstein, J. R., Crane, J. D., De Lee, N. M.,
Klaene, M. A., Kreckel, K., MacDonald, N., Merloni, A., Ness,
M. K., O’Brien, T., Sanchez-Gallego, J. R., Sayres, C. C., Shen,
Y., Thakar, A. R., Tkachenko, A., Aerts, C., Blanton, M. R.,
Eisenstein, D. J., Holtzman, J. A., Maoz, D., Nandra, K., Rock-
osi, C., Weinberg, D. H., Bovy, J., Casey, A. R., Chaname, J.,
Clerc, N., Conroy, C., Eracleous, M., Gänsicke, B. T., Hekker, S.,
Horne, K., Kauﬀmann, J., McQuinn, K. B. W., Pellegrini, E. W.,
Schinnerer, E., Schlaﬂy, E. F., Schwope, A. D., Seibert, M., Teske,
J. K., van Saders, J. L., Nov 2017. SDSS-V: Pioneering Panoptic
Spectroscopy. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1711.03234.
Komberg, B. V., Feb. 1968. A Binary System as a Quasar Model.
Soviet Ast. 11, 727.
Komossa, S., Burwitz, V., Hasinger, G., Predehl, P., Kaastra, J. S.,
Ikebe, Y., Jan. 2003. Discovery of a Binary Active Galactic Nu-
cleus in the Ultraluminous Infrared Galaxy NGC 6240 Using
Chandra. ApJ 582, L15–L19.
Komossa, S., Zensus, J. A., Feb. 2016. Compact object mergers:
observations of supermassive binary black holes and stellar tidal
disruption events. In: Meiron, Y., Li, S., Liu, F.-K., Spurzem, R.
(Eds.), Star Clusters and Black Holes in Galaxies across Cosmic
Time. Vol. 312 of IAU Symposium. pp. 13–25.
Koratkar, A. P., Gaskell, C. M., Mar. 1991. Structure and kinematics
of the broad-line regions in active galaxies from IUE variability
data. ApJS 75, 719–750.
Kormendy, J., Ho, L. C., Aug. 2013. Coevolution (Or Not) of Super-
massive Black Holes and Host Galaxies. ARA&A 51, 511–653.
Kosec, P., Brightman, M., Stern, D., Müller-Sánchez, F., Koss, M.,
Oh, K., Assef, R. J., Gandhi, P., Harrison, F. A., Jun, H., et al.,
Nov 2017. Investigating the evolution of the dual agn system eso
509-ig066. The Astrophysical Journal 850 (2), 168.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aa932e
Koss, M., Mushotzky, R., Treister, E., Veilleux, S., Vasudevan, R.,
Miller, N., Sanders, D. B., Schawinski, K., Trippe, M., Jul. 2011.
Chandra Discovery of a Binary Active Galactic Nucleus in Mrk
739. ApJ 735, L42.
Koss, M., Mushotzky, R., Treister, E., Veilleux, S., Vasudevan, R.,
Trippe, M., Feb. 2012. Understanding Dual Active Galactic Nu-
cleus Activation in the nearby Universe. ApJ 746, L22.
Koss, M., Mushotzky, R., Veilleux, S., Winter, L., Jun. 2010. Merg-
ing and Clustering of the Swift BAT AGN Sample. ApJ 716, L125–
L130.
Koss, M. J., Blecha, L., Bernhard, P., Hung, C.-L., Lu, J. R., Trak-
thenbrot, B., Treister, E., Weigel, A., Sartori, L. F., Mushotzky,
R., Schawinski, K., Ricci, C., Veilleux, S., Sanders, D. B., Nov.
2018. A population of luminous accreting black holes with hidden
mergers. Nature 563, 214–216.
Koss, M. J., Romero-Cañizales, C., Baronchelli, L., Teng, S. H.,
Baloković, M., Puccetti, S., Bauer, F. E., Arévalo, P., Assef, R.,
Ballantyne, D. R., Brandt, W. N., Brightman, M., Comastri, A.,
Gandhi, P., Harrison, F. A., Luo, B., Schawinski, K., Stern, D.,
Treister, E., Jul. 2015. Broadband Observations of the Compton-
thick Nucleus of NGC 3393. ApJ 807, 149.
Kovalev, Y. Y., Petrov, L., Plavin, A. V., Feb. 2017. VLBI-Gaia
oﬀsets favor parsec-scale jet direction in active galactic nuclei.
A&A 598, L1.
Krolik, J. H., Volonteri, M., Dubois, Y., Devriendt, J., Jul 2019.
Population Estimates for Electromagnetically Distinguishable Su-
permassive Binary Black Holes. ApJ 879 (2), 110.
Kun, E., Frey, S., Gabányi, K. É., Britzen, S., Cseh, D., Gergely,
L. Á., Dec. 2015. Constraining the parameters of the putative
supermassive binary black hole in PG 1302-102 from its radio
structure. MNRAS 454, 1290–1296.
Kun, E., Gabányi, K. É., Karouzos, M., Britzen, S., Gergely, L. Á.,
Dec. 2014. A spinning supermassive black hole binary model con-
sistent with VLBI observations of the S5 1928+738 jet. MNRAS
445, 1370–1382.
Lacy, M., Ridgway, S. E., Sajina, A., Petric, A. O., Gates, E. L.,
Urrutia, T., Storrie-Lombardi, L. J., Apr. 2015. The Spitzer Mid-
infrared AGN Survey. II. The Demographics and Cosmic Evolu-
tion of the AGN Population. ApJ 802, 102.
Lang, R. N., Hughes, S. A., Apr. 2008. Localizing Coalescing Massive
Black Hole Binaries with Gravitational Waves. ApJ 677, 1184–
1200.
Lantz, B., Aldering, G., Antilogus, P., Bonnaud, C., Capoani, L.,
Castera, A., Copin, Y., Dubet, D., Gangler, E., Henault, F.,
Lemonnier, J.-P., Pain, R., Pecontal, A., Pecontal, E., Smadja,
G., Feb. 2004. SNIFS: a wideband integral ﬁeld spectrograph with
microlens arrays. In: Mazuray, L., Rogers, P. J., Wartmann, R.
(Eds.), Optical Design and Engineering. Vol. 5249 of Proc. SPIE
. pp. 146–155.
Lanzuisi, G., Civano, F., Marchesi, S., Comastri, A., Brusa, M.,
Gilli, R., Vignali, C., Zamorani, G., Brightman, M., Griﬃths,
R. E., Koekemoer, A. M., Oct. 2018. The Chandra COSMOS
Legacy Survey: Compton thick AGN at high redshift. MNRAS
480, 2578–2592.
Lanzuisi, G., Civano, F., Marchesi, S., Comastri, A., Costantini,
E., Elvis, M., Mainieri, V., Hickox, R., Jahnke, K., Komossa, S.,
Piconcelli, E., Vignali, C., Brusa, M., Cappelluti, N., Fruscione,
A., Nov. 2013. The XMM-Newton Spectrum of a Candidate Re-
coiling Supermassive Black Hole: An Elusive Inverted P-Cygni
60
Proﬁle. ApJ 778, 62.
Larkin, J., Barczys, M., Krabbe, A., Adkins, S., Aliado, T., Amico,
P., Brims, G., Campbell, R., Canﬁeld, J., Gasaway, T., Honey,
A., Iserlohe, C., Johnson, C., Kress, E., LaFreniere, D., Lyke, J.,
Magnone, K., Magnone, N., McElwain, M., Moon, J., Quirren-
bach, A., Skulason, G., Song, I., Spencer, M., Weiss, J., Wright,
S., Jun. 2006. OSIRIS: a diﬀraction limited integral ﬁeld spec-
trograph for Keck. In: Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series. Vol. 6269 of Proc. SPIE . p.
62691A.
Leahy, J. P., Parma, P., 1992. Multiple outbursts in radio galaxies.
In: Roland, J., Sol, H., Pelletier, G. (Eds.), Extragalactic Radio
Sources. From Beams to Jets. pp. 307–308.
Lehmer, B. D., Basu-Zych, A. R., Mineo, S., Brand t, W. N., Eu-
frasio, R. T., Fragos, T., Hornschemeier, A. E., Luo, B., Xue,
Y. Q., Bauer, F. E., Jul 2016. The Evolution of Normal Galaxy
X-Ray Emission through Cosmic History: Constraints from the 6
MS Chandra Deep Field-South. ApJ 825 (1), 7.
Lemons, S. M., Reines, A. E., Plotkin, R. M., Gallo, E., Greene,
J. E., May 2015. An X-Ray Selected Sample of Candidate Black
Holes in Dwarf Galaxies. ApJ 805 (1), 12.
Lena, D., 2015. Aspects of Supermassive Black Hole Growth in
Nearby Active Galactic Nuclei. Ph.D. thesis, Rochester Institute
of Technology.
Lena, D., Panizo-Espinar, G., Jonker, P. G., Torres, M., Heida, M.,
May 2018. Characterisation of a candidate dual AGN. MNRAS .
Lewis, K. T., Eracleous, M., Storchi-Bergmann, T., Apr. 2010. Long-
term Proﬁle Variability in Active Galactic Nucleus with Double-
peaked Balmer Emission Lines. ApJS 187, 416–446.
Li, S., Liu, F. K., Berczik, P., Spurzem, R., Jan 2017. Boosted Tidal
Disruption by Massive Black Hole Binaries During Galaxy Merg-
ers from the View of N-Body Simulation. ApJ 834 (2), 195.
Li, Y.-R., Wang, J.-M., Ho, L. C., Lu, K.-X., Qiu, J., Du, P., Hu,
C., Huang, Y.-K., Zhang, Z.-X., Wang, K., Bai, J.-M., May 2016.
Spectroscopic Indication of a Centi-parsec Supermassive Black
Hole Binary in the Galactic Center of NGC 5548. ApJ 822, 4.
Lien, A., Chakraborty, N., Fields, B. D., Kemball, A., Oct. 2011.
Radio Supernovae in the Great Survey Era. ApJ 740, 23.
Lin, D. N. C., Papaloizou, J., Oct. 1986. On the tidal interaction
between protoplanets and the protoplanetary disk. III - Orbital
migration of protoplanets. ApJ 309, 846–857.
Liska, M., Hesp, C., Tchekhovskoy, A., Ingram, A., van der Klis, M.,
Markoﬀ, S., Feb. 2018. Formation of precessing jets by tilted black
hole discs in 3D general relativistic MHD simulations. MNRAS
474, L81–L85.
Liu, F. K., Li, S., Chen, X., Nov 2009. Interruption of Tidal-
Disruption Flares by Supermassive Black Hole Binaries. ApJ
706 (1), L133–L137.
Liu, F. K., Li, S., Komossa, S., May 2014a. A Milliparsec Su-
permassive Black Hole Binary Candidate in the Galaxy SDSS
J120136.02+300305.5. ApJ 786 (2), 103.
Liu, F. K., Wu, X., Cao, S. L., Apr. 2003. Double-double radio galax-
ies: remnants of merged supermassive binary black holes. MNRAS
340, 411–416.
Liu, J., Eracleous, M., Halpern, J. P., Jan. 2016a. A Radial Velocity
Test for Supermassive Black Hole Binaries as an Explanation for
Broad, Double-peaked Emission Lines in Active Galactic Nuclei.
ApJ 817, 42.
Liu, T., Gezari, S., Burgett, W., Chambers, K., Draper, P., Hodapp,
K., Huber, M., Kudritzki, R.-P., Magnier, E., Metcalfe, N., Tonry,
J., Wainscoat, R., Waters, C., Dec. 2016b. A Systematic Search
for Periodically Varying Quasars in Pan-STARRS1: An Extended
Baseline Test in Medium Deep Survey Field MD09. ApJ 833, 6.
Liu, T., Gezari, S., Heinis, S., Magnier, E. A., Burgett, W. S., Cham-
bers, K., Flewelling, H., Huber, M., Hodapp, K. W., Kaiser, N.,
Kudritzki, R.-P., Tonry, J. L., Wainscoat, R. J., Waters, C., Apr.
2015. A Periodically Varying Luminous Quasar at z = 2 from the
Pan-STARRS1 Medium Deep Survey: A Candidate Supermassive
Black Hole Binary in the Gravitational Wave-driven Regime. ApJ
803, L16.
Liu, T., Gezari, S., Miller, M. C., May 2018a. Did ASAS-SN Kill the
Supermassive Black Hole Binary Candidate PG1302-102?
ApJ
859 (1), L12.
Liu, X., Civano, F., Shen, Y., Green, P., Greene, J. E., Strauss,
M. A., Jan. 2013. Chandra X-Ray and Hubble Space Telescope
Imaging of Optically Selected Kiloparsec-scale Binary Active
Galactic Nuclei. I. Nature of the Nuclear Ionizing Sources. ApJ
762, 110.
Liu, X., Greene, J. E., Shen, Y., Strauss, M. A., May 2010a. Dis-
covery of Four kpc-scale Binary Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 715,
L30–L34.
Liu, X., Guo, H., Shen, Y., Greene, J. E., Strauss, M. A., Jul 2018b.
Hubble Space Telescope Wide Field Camera 3 Identiﬁes an r p =
1 Kpc Dual Active Galactic Nucleus in the Minor Galaxy Merger
SDSS J0924+0510 at z = 0.1495. ApJ 862 (1), 29.
Liu, X., Shen, Y., Bian, F., Loeb, A., Tremaine, S., Jul. 2014b. Con-
straining Sub-parsec Binary Supermassive Black Holes in Quasars
with Multi-epoch Spectroscopy. II. The Population with Kinemat-
ically Oﬀset Broad Balmer Emission Lines. ApJ 789, 140.
Liu, X., Shen, Y., Strauss, M. A., Jul. 2011. Cosmic Train Wreck
by Massive Black Holes: Discovery of a Kiloparsec-scale Triple
Active Galactic Nucleus. ApJ 736, L7.
Liu, X., Shen, Y., Strauss, M. A., Greene, J. E., Jan. 2010b. Type 2
Active Galactic Nuclei with Double-Peaked [O III] Lines: Narrow-
Line Region Kinematics or Merging Supermassive Black Hole
Pairs? ApJ 708, 427–434.
Lobanov, A. P., Roland, J., Mar. 2005. A supermassive binary black
hole in the quasar 3C 345. A&A 431, 831–846.
Lodato, G., Nayakshin, S., King, A. R., Pringle, J. E., Sep. 2009.
Black hole mergers: can gas discs solve the ‘ﬁnal parsec’ problem?
MNRAS 398, 1392–1402.
Luo, B., Brandt, W. N., Xue, Y. Q., Lehmer, B., Alexander, D. M.,
Bauer, F. E., Vito, F., Yang, G., Basu-Zych, A. R., Comastri, A.,
Gilli, R., Gu, Q.-S., Hornschemeier, A. E., Koekemoer, A., Liu,
T., Mainieri, V., Paolillo, M., Ranalli, P., Rosati, P., Schneider,
D. P., Shemmer, O., Smail, I., Sun, M., Tozzi, P., Vignali, C.,
Wang, J.-X., Jan. 2017. The Chandra Deep Field-South Survey:
7 Ms Source Catalogs. ApJS 228, 2.
Lupi, A., Haardt, F., Dotti, M., Jan. 2015a. Massive black hole and
gas dynamics in galaxy nuclei mergers - I. Numerical implemen-
tation. MNRAS 446, 1765–1774.
Lupi, A., Haardt, F., Dotti, M., Colpi, M., Nov. 2015b. Massive black
hole and gas dynamics in mergers of galaxy nuclei - II. Black hole
sinking in star-forming nuclear discs. MNRAS 453, 3437–3446.
Lusso, E., Fumagalli, M., Rafelski, M., Neeleman, M., Prochaska,
J. X., Hennawi, J. F., O’Meara, J. M., Theuns, T., Jun. 2018.
The Spectral and Environment Properties of z∼2.0-2.5 Quasar
Pairs. ApJ 860, 41.
Lusso, E., et al., Sep. 2012. Bolometric luminosities and Edding-
ton ratios of X-ray selected active galactic nuclei in the XMM-
COSMOS survey. MNRAS 425, 623–640.
Lyu, Y., Liu, X., Nov. 2016. A high fraction of double-peaked narrow
emission lines in powerful active galactic nuclei. MNRAS 463, 24–
36.
MacFadyen, A. I., Milosavljević, M., Jan. 2008. An Eccentric Cir-
cumbinary Accretion Disk and the Detection of Binary Massive
Black Holes. ApJ 672, 83–93.
Marchesi, S., Civano, F., Elvis, M., Salvato, M., Brusa, M., Comas-
tri, A., Gilli, R., Hasinger, G., Lanzuisi, G., Miyaji, T., Treister,
E., Urry, C. M., Vignali, C., Zamorani, G., Allevato, V., Cappel-
luti, N., Cardamone, C., Finoguenov, A., Griﬃths, R. E., Karim,
A., Laigle, C., LaMassa, S. M., Jahnke, K., Ranalli, P., Schaw-
inski, K., Schinnerer, E., Silverman, J. D., Smolcic, V., Suh, H.,
Trakhtenbrot, B., Jan. 2016. The Chandra COSMOS Legacy sur-
vey: optical/IR identiﬁcations. ApJ 817, 34.
Marconi, A., Risaliti, G., Gilli, R., Hunt, L. K., Maiolino, R., Salvati,
M., Jun. 2004. Local supermassive black holes, relics of active
galactic nuclei and the X-ray background. MNRAS 351, 169–185.
Martin, G., Kaviraj, S., Volonteri, M., Simmons, B. D., Devriendt,
J. E. G., Lintott, C. J., Smethurst, R. J., Dubois, Y., Pichon, C.,
May 2018. Normal black holes in bulge-less galaxies: the largely
quiescent, merger-free growth of black holes over cosmic time. MN-
61
RAS 476 (2), 2801–2812.
Mateos, S., Alonso-Herrero, A., Carrera, F. J., Blain, A., Watson,
M. G., Barcons, X., Braito, V., Severgnini, P., Donley, J. L.,
Stern, D., Nov. 2012. Using the Bright Ultrahard XMM-Newton
survey to deﬁne an IR selection of luminous AGN based on WISE
colours. MNRAS 426, 3271–3281.
Mateos, S., Carrera, F. J., Barcons, X., Alonso- Herrero, A., Hernán-
Caballero, A., Page, M., Ramos Almeida, C., Caccianiga, A.,
Miyaji, T., Blain, A., Jun. 2017. Survival of the Obscuring Torus
in the Most Powerful Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 841, L18.
Mayer, L., Dec. 2013. Massive black hole binaries in gas-rich galaxy
mergers; multiple regimes of orbital decay and interplay with gas
inﬂows. Classical and Quantum Gravity 30 (24), 244008.
Mayer, L., Bonoli, S., Jan. 2019. The route to massive black hole
formation via merger-driven direct collapse: a review. Reports on
Progress in Physics 82 (1), 016901.
Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Escala, A., Callegari, S., Aug 2010. Direct
formation of supermassive black holes via multi-scale gas inﬂows
in galaxy mergers. Nature 466 (7310), 1082–1084.
Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Madau, P., Colpi, M., Quinn, T., Wad-
sley, J., Jun. 2007. Rapid Formation of Supermassive Black Hole
Binaries in Galaxy Mergers with Gas. Science 316, 1874–.
Mazzarella, J. M., Iwasawa, K., Vavilkin, T., Armus, L., Kim, D.-C.,
Bothun, G., Evans, A. S., Spoon, H. W. W., Haan, S., How-
ell, J. H., Lord, S., Marshall, J. A., Ishida, C. M., Xu, C. K.,
Petric, A., Sanders, D. B., Surace, J. A., Appleton, P., Chan,
B. H. P., Frayer, D. T., Inami, H., Khachikian, E. Y., Madore,
B. F., Privon, G. C., Sturm, E., U, V., Veilleux, S., Nov. 2012.
Investigation of Dual Active Nuclei, Outﬂows, Shock-heated Gas,
and Young Star Clusters in Markarian 266. AJ 144, 125.
McAlpine, S., Bower, R. G., Rosario, D. J., Crain, R. A., Schaye, J.,
Theuns, T., Dec 2018. The rapid growth phase of supermassive
black holes. MNRAS 481 (3), 3118–3128.
McGee, S., Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., Oct. 2018. The assembly of cos-
mic structure from baryons to black holes with joint gravitational-
wave and X-ray observations. arXiv e-prints.
McGurk, R. C., Max, C. E., Medling, A. M., Shields, G. A., Comer-
ford, J. M., Sep 2015. Spatially resolved imaging and spectroscopy
of candidate dual active galactic nuclei. The Astrophysical Jour-
nal 811 (1), 14.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/811/1/14
McGurk, R. C., Max, C. E., Rosario, D. J., Shields, G. A., Smith,
K. L., Wright, S. A., Sep. 2011. Spatially Resolved Spectroscopy
of SDSS J0952+2552: A Conﬁrmed Dual Active Galactic Nucleus.
ApJ 738, L2.
McKernan, B., Ford, K. E. S., Sep 2015. Detection of radial velocity
shifts due to black hole binaries near merger. MNRAS 452, L1–L5.
McWilliams, S. T., Lang, R. N., Baker, J. G., Thorpe, J. I., Sep.
2011. Sky localization of complete inspiral-merger-ringdown sig-
nals for nonspinning massive black hole binaries. Phys. Rev. D
84 (6), 064003.
Mechtley, M., Jahnke, K., Windhorst, R. A., Andrae, R., Cister-
nas, M., Cohen, S. H., Hewlett, T., Koekemoer, A. M., Schramm,
M., Schulze, A., Silverman, J. D., Villforth, C., van der Wel, A.,
Wisotzki, L., Oct. 2016. Do the Most Massive Black Holes at z =
2 Grow via Major Mergers? ApJ 830, 156.
Medling, A. M., U, V., Guedes, J., Max, C. E., Mayer, L., Armus,
L., Holden, B., Roškar, R., Sanders, D., Mar. 2014. Stellar and
Gaseous Nuclear Disks Observed in Nearby (U)LIRGs. ApJ 784,
70.
Medling, A. M., U, V., Max, C. E., Sanders, D. B., Armus, L.,
Holden, B., Mieda, E., Wright, S. A., Larkin, J. E., Apr. 2015.
Following Black Hole Scaling Relations through Gas-rich Mergers.
ApJ 803, 61.
Meier, D. L., Feb. 2001. The Association of Jet Production with
Geometrically Thick Accretion Flows and Black Hole Rotation.
ApJ 548, L9–L12.
Merloni, A., Predehl, P., Becker, W., Böhringer, H., Boller, T.,
Brunner, H., Brusa, M., Dennerl, K., Freyberg, M., Friedrich, P.,
Georgakakis, A., Haberl, F., Hasinger, G., Meidinger, N., Mohr,
J., Nandra, K., Rau, A., Reiprich, T. H., Robrade, J., Salvato,
M., Santangelo, A., Sasaki, M., Schwope, A., Wilms, J., Ger-
man eROSITA Consortium, t., Sep. 2012. eROSITA Science Book:
Mapping the Structure of the Energetic Universe. arXiv e-prints.
Merritt, D., Ekers, R. D., Aug. 2002. Tracing Black Hole Mergers
Through Radio Lobe Morphology. Science 297, 1310–1313.
Merritt, D., Poon, M. Y., May 2004. Chaotic Loss Cones and Black
Hole Fueling. ApJ 606, 788–798.
Mezcua, M., Civano, F., Marchesi, S., Suh, H., Fabbiano, G., Volon-
teri, M., Aug. 2018. Intermediate-mass black holes in dwarf galax-
ies out to redshift ∼2.4 in the Chandra COSMOS Legacy Survey.
MNRAS 478, 2576–2591.
Middelberg, E., Deller, A. T., Norris, R. P., Fotopoulou, S., Sal-
vato, M., Morgan, J. S., Brisken, W., Lutz, D., Rovilos, E.,
Mar. 2013. Mosaiced wide-ﬁeld VLBI observations of the Lock-
man Hole/XMM. Astronomy & Astrophysics 551, A97.
Middleton, H., Chen, S., Del Pozzo, W., Sesana, A., Vecchio, A.,
Mar. 2018. No tension between assembly models of super massive
black hole binaries and pulsar observations. Nature Communica-
tions 9, 573.
Mihos, J. C., Hernquist, L., Jun. 1996. Gasdynamics and Starbursts
in Major Mergers. ApJ 464, 641.
Milosavljević, M., Merritt, D., Dec. 2001. Formation of Galactic Nu-
clei. ApJ 563, 34–62.
Milosavljević, M., Phinney, E. S., Apr. 2005. The Afterglow of Mas-
sive Black Hole Coalescence. ApJ 622, L93–L96.
Miranda, R., Muñoz, D. J., Lai, D., Apr. 2017. Viscous hydrody-
namics simulations of circumbinary accretion discs: variability,
quasi-steady state and angular momentum transfer. MNRAS 466,
1170–1191.
Mirza, M. A., Tahir, A., Khan, F. M., Holley-Bockelmann, H., Baig,
A. M., Berczik, P., Chishtie, F., Sep 2017. Galaxy rotation and
supermassive black hole binary evolution. MNRAS 470 (1), 940–
947.
Mohan, P., An, T., Frey, S., Mangalam, A., Gabányi, K. É., Kun, E.,
Dec. 2016. Parsec-scale jet properties of the quasar PG 1302-102.
MNRAS 463, 1812–1821.
Montuori, C., Dotti, M., Colpi, M., Decarli, R., Haardt, F., Mar.
2011. Search for sub-parsec massive binary black holes through
line diagnosis. MNRAS 412, 26–32.
Montuori, C., Dotti, M., Haardt, F., Colpi, M., Decarli, R., Sep.
2012. Search for sub-parsec massive binary black holes through
line diagnosis - II. MNRAS 425, 1633–1639.
Moody, M. S. L., Shi, J.-M., Stone, J. M., Apr 2019. Hydrodynamic
Torques in Circumbinary Accretion Disks. ApJ 875 (1), 66.
Mooley, K. P., Wrobel, J. M., Anderson, M. M., Hallinan, G., Jan.
2018. The twisted radio structure of PSO J334.2028+01.4075, still
a supermassive binary black hole candidate. MNRAS 473, 1388–
1393.
Moran, E. C., Shahinyan, K., Sugarman, H. R., Vélez, D. O., Era-
cleous, M., Dec 2014. Black Holes At the Centers of Nearby Dwarf
Galaxies. AJ 148 (6), 136.
Muñoz, D. J., Miranda, R., Lai, D., Jan. 2019. Hydrodynamics of
Circumbinary Accretion: Angular Momentum Transfer and Bi-
nary Orbital Evolution. ApJ 871, 84.
Müller-Sánchez, F., Comerford, J. M., Nevin, R., Barrows, R. S.,
Cooper, M. C., Greene, J. E., Nov. 2015. The Origin of Double-
peaked Narrow Lines in Active Galactic Nuclei. I. Very Large Ar-
ray Detections of Dual AGNs and AGN Outﬂows. Astrophysical
Journal 813, 103.
Munshi, F., Governato, F., Brooks, A. M., Christensen, C., Shen,
S., Loebman, S., Moster, B., Quinn, T., Wadsley, J., Mar. 2013.
Reproducing the Stellar Mass/Halo Mass Relation in Simulated
ΛCDM Galaxies: Theory versus Observational Estimates. ApJ
766, 56.
Murphy, E. J., Aug. 2018. A next-generation Very Large Array.
In: Tarchi, A., Reid, M. J., Castangia, P. (Eds.), Astrophysi-
cal Masers: Unlocking the Mysteries of the Universe. Vol. 336 of
IAU Symposium. pp. 426–432.
Mushotzky, R., Jul 2018. AXIS: a probe class next generation
high angular resolution x-ray imaging satellite. In: Proc. SPIE .
Vol. 10699 of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
62
(SPIE) Conference Series. p. 1069929.
Myers, A. D., Richards, G. T., Brunner, R. J., Schneider, D. P.,
Strand, N. E., Hall, P. B., Blomquist, J. A., York, D. G., May
2008. Quasar Clustering at 25 h−1 kpc from a Complete Sample
of Binaries. ApJ 678, 635–646.
Nan, R., Li, D., Jin, C., Wang, Q., Zhu, L., Zhu, W., Zhang, H., Yue,
Y., Qian, L., 2011. The Five-Hundred Aperture Spherical Radio
Telescope (fast) Project. International Journal of Modern Physics
D 20, 989–1024.
Nandra, K., Barret, D., Barcons, X., Fabian, A., den Herder, J.-
W., Piro, L., Watson, M., Adami, C., Aird, J., Afonso, J. M.,
et al., Jun. 2013. The Hot and Energetic Universe: A White Paper
presenting the science theme motivating the Athena+ mission.
arXiv e-prints.
Nardini, E., Nov. 2017. Nuclear absorption and emission in the AGN
merger NGC 6240 : the hard X-ray view. MNRAS 471, 3483–3493.
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., White, S. D. M., May 1996. The Struc-
ture of Cold Dark Matter Halos. ApJ 462, 563.
Newton, R. D. A., Kay, S. T., Oct. 2013. A study of AGN and
supernova feedback in simulations of isolated and merging disc
galaxies. MNRAS 434, 3606–3627.
Nguyen, K., Bogdanović, T., Sep. 2016. Emission Signatures from
Sub-parsec Binary Supermassive Black Holes. I. Diagnostic Power
of Broad Emission Lines. ApJ 828, 68.
Nguyen, K., Bogdanović, T., Runnoe, J. C., Eracleous, M., Sigurds-
son, S., Boroson, T., Jan. 2019a. Emission Signatures from Sub-
parsec Binary Supermassive Black Holes. II. Eﬀect of Accretion
Disk Wind on Broad Emission Lines. ApJ 870, 16.
Nguyen, K., Bogdanovic, T., Runnoe, J. C., Eracleous, M., Sig-
urdsson, S., Boroson, T., Aug 2019b. Emission Signatures from
Sub-parsec Binary Supermassive Black Holes III: Comparison of
Models with Observations. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1908.01799.
Noble, S. C., Mundim, B. C., Nakano, H., Krolik, J. H., Campanelli,
M., Zlochower, Y., Yunes, N., Aug. 2012. Circumbinary Magneto-
hydrodynamic Accretion into Inspiraling Binary Black Holes. ApJ
755, 51.
Norris, R., Basu, K., Brown, M., Carretti, E., Kapinska, A. D.,
Prandoni, I., Rudnick, L., Seymour, N., Apr. 2015. The SKA Mid-
frequency All-sky Continuum Survey: Discovering the unexpected
and transforming radio-astronomy. Advancing Astrophysics with
the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 86.
Norris, R. P., Hopkins, A. M., Afonso, J., Brown, S., Condon, J. J.,
Dunne, L., Feain, I., Hollow, R., Jarvis, M., Johnston-Hollitt, M.,
Lenc, E., Middelberg, E., Padovani, P., Prandoni, I., Rudnick, L.,
Seymour, N., Umana, G., Andernach, H., Alexander, D. M., Ap-
pleton, P. N., Bacon, D., Banﬁeld, J., Becker, W., Brown, M. J. I.,
Ciliegi, P., Jackson, C., Eales, S., Edge, A. C., Gaensler, B. M.,
Giovannini, G., Hales, C. A., Hancock, P., Huynh, M. T., Ibar, E.,
Ivison, R. J., Kennicutt, R., Kimball, A. E., Koekemoer, A. M.,
Koribalski, B. S., López-Sánchez, Á. R., Mao, M. Y., Murphy,
T., Messias, H., Pimbblet, K. A., Raccanelli, A., Randall, K. E.,
Reiprich, T. H., Roseboom, I. G., Röttgering, H., Saikia, D. J.,
Sharp, R. G., Slee, O. B., Smail, I., Thompson, M. A., Urquhart,
J. S., Wall, J. V., Zhao, G.-B., Aug. 2011. EMU: Evolutionary
Map of the Universe. PASA 28, 215–248.
Novak, M., Smolčić, V., Civano, F., Bondi, M., Ciliegi, P., Wang, X.,
Loeb, A., Banﬁeld, J., Bourke, S., Elvis, M., Hallinan, G., Intema,
H. T., Klöckner, H.-R., Mooley, K., Navarrete, F., Feb 2015. New
insights from deep VLA data on the potentially recoiling black
hole CID-42 in the COSMOS ﬁeld. MNRAS 447 (2), 1282–1288.
Nyland, K., Harwood, J. J., Mukherjee, D., Jagannathan, P., Ru-
jopakarn, W., Emonts, B., Alatalo, K., Bicknell, G. V., Davis,
T. A., Greene, J. E., Kimball, A., Lacy, M., Lonsdale, C., Lons-
dale, C., Maksym, W. P., Molnár, D. C., Morabito, L., Murphy,
E. J., Patil, P., Prandoni, I., Sargent, M., Vlahakis, C., May 2018.
Revolutionizing Our Understanding of AGN Feedback and its Im-
portance to Galaxy Evolution in the Era of the Next Generation
Very Large Array. ApJ 859, 23.
O’Brien, P. T., Dietrich, M., Leighly, K., Alloin, D., Clavel, J., Cren-
shaw, D. M., Horne, K., Kriss, G. A., Krolik, J. H., Malkan,
M. A., Netzer, H., Peterson, B. M., Reichert, G. A., Rodríguez-
Pascual, P. M., Wamsteker, W., Anderson, K. S. J., Bochkarev,
N. G., Cheng, F.-Z., Filippenko, A. V., Gaskell, C. M., George,
I. M., Goad, M. R., Ho, L. C., Kaspi, S., Kollatschny, W., Korista,
K. T., MacAlpine, G., Marlow, D., Martin, P. G., Morris, S. L.,
Pogge, R. W., Qian, B.-C., Recondo-Gonzalez, M. C., Espinosa,
J. M. R., Santos-Lleó, M., Shapovalova, A. I., Shull, J. M., Stirpe,
G. M., Sun, W.-H., Turner, T. J., Vio, R., Wagner, S., Wanders,
I., Wills, K. A., Wu, H., Xue, S.-J., Zou, Z.-L., Dec. 1998. Steps
toward Determination of the Size and Structure of the Broad-Line
Region in Active Galactic Nuclei. XIII. Ultraviolet Observations
of the Broad-Line Radio Galaxy 3C 390.3. ApJ 509, 163–176.
O’Dea, C. P., May 1998. The Compact Steep-Spectrum and Giga-
hertz Peaked-Spectrum Radio Sources. PASP 110, 493–532.
Okamoto, T., Nemmen, R. S., Bower, R. G., Mar. 2008. The im-
pact of radio feedback from active galactic nuclei in cosmological
simulations: formation of disc galaxies. MNRAS 385, 161–180.
Orosz, G., Frey, S., May 2013. Optical-radio positional oﬀsets for
active galactic nuclei. A&A 553, A13.
Owen, F. N., O’Dea, C. P., Inoue, M., Eilek, J. A., Jul. 1985. VLA
observations of the multiple jet galaxy 3C 75. Astrophysical Jour-
nal Letters 294, L85–L88.
Paardekooper, S.-J., Mellema, G., Nov. 2006. Halting type I planet
migration in non-isothermal disks. A&A 459, L17–L20.
Padovani, P., Combes, F., Diaz Trigo, M., Ettori, S., Hatzimi-
naoglou, E., Jonker, P., Salvato, M., Viti, S., Adami, C., Aird,
J., Alexander, D., Casella, P., Ceccarelli, C., Churazov, E., Cira-
suolo, M., Daddi, E., Edge, A., Feruglio, C., Mainieri, V., Markoﬀ,
S., Merloni, A., Nicastro, F., O’Brien, P., Oskinova, L., Panessa,
F., Pointecouteau, E., Rau, A., Robrade, J., Schaye, J., Stoehr,
F., Testi, L., Tombesi, F., May 2017. ESO-Athena Synergy White
Paper. arXiv e-prints.
Pakmor, R., Bauer, A., Springel, V., Dec. 2011. Magnetohydrody-
namics on an unstructured moving grid. MNRAS 418, 1392–1401.
Pakmor, R., Springel, V., Jun. 2013. Simulations of magnetic ﬁelds
in isolated disc galaxies. MNRAS 432, 176–193.
Palenzuela, C., Lehner, L., Liebling, S. L., Aug. 2010. Dual Jets from
Binary Black Holes. Science 329, 927–930.
Paragi, Z., Godfrey, L., Reynolds, C., Rioja, M. J., Deller, A., Zhang,
B., Gurvits, L., Bietenholz, M., Szomoru, A., Bignall, H. E.,
Boven, P., Charlot, P., Dodson, R., Frey, S., Garrett, M. A.,
Imai, H., Lobanov, A., Reid, M. J., Ros, E., van Langevelde,
H. J., Zensus, A. J., Zheng, X. W., Alberdi, A., Agudo, I., An,
T., Argo, M., Beswick, R., Biggs, A., Brunthaler, A., Campbell,
B., Cimo, G., Colomer, F., Corbel, S., Conway, J. E., Cseh, D.,
Deane, R., Falcke, H. D. E., Gawronski, M., Gaylard, M., Gio-
vannini, G., Giroletti, M., Goddi, C., Goedhart, S., Gómez, J. L.,
Gunn, A., Kharb, P., Kloeckner, H. R., Koerding, E., Kovalev,
Y., Kunert-Bajraszewska, M., Lindqvist, M., Lister, M., Manto-
vani, F., Marti-Vidal, I., Mezcua, M., McKean, J., Middelberg, E.,
Miller-Jones, J. C. A., Moldon, J., Muxlow, T., O’Brien, T., Perez-
Torres, M., Pogrebenko, S. V., Quick, J., Rushton, A., Schilizzi,
R., Smirnov, O., Sohn, B. W., Surcis, G., Taylor, G. B., Tingay,
S., Tudose, V. M., van der Horst, A., van Leeuwen, J., Venturi,
T., Vermeulen, R., Vlemmings, W. H. T., de Witt, A., Wucknitz,
O., Yang, J., Gabänyi, K., Jung, T., Apr. 2015. Very Long Base-
line Interferometry with the SKA. Advancing Astrophysics with
the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 143.
Park, K., Bogdanović, T., Apr. 2017. Gaseous Dynamical Friction in
Presence of Black Hole Radiative Feedback. ApJ 838, 103.
Peng, Z.-X., Chen, Y.-M., Gu, Q.-S., Hu, C., Apr. 2011. Quasar
SDSS J142507.32+323137.4: dual AGNs? Research in Astronomy
and Astrophysics 11, 411–418.
Peres, A., Dec 1962. Classical Radiation Recoil. Physical Review
128 (5), 2471–2475.
Perley, D. A., Perley, R. A., Dhawan, V., Carilli, C. L., Jun. 2017.
Discovery of a Luminous Radio Transient 460 pc from the Central
Supermassive Black Hole in Cygnus A. ApJ 841, 117.
Peters, P. C., Mathews, J., Jul. 1963. Gravitational Radiation from
Point Masses in a Keplerian Orbit. Physical Review 131, 435–440.
Peterson, B. M., Wandel, A., Sep. 2000. Evidence for Supermassive
Black Holes in Active Galactic Nuclei from Emission-Line Rever-
63
beration. ApJ 540, L13–L16.
Petric, A. O., Armus, L., Howell, J., Chan, B., Mazzarella, J. M.,
Evans, A. S., Surace, J. A., Sanders, D., Appleton, P., Char-
mandaris, V., Díaz-Santos, T., Frayer, D., Haan, S., Inami, H.,
Iwasawa, K., Kim, D., Madore, B., Marshall, J., Spoon, H., Stier-
walt, S., Sturm, E., U, V., Vavilkin, T., Veilleux, S., Mar. 2011.
Mid-Infrared Spectral Diagnostics of Luminous Infrared Galaxies.
ApJ 730, 28.
Petts, J. A., Gualandris, A., Read, J. I., Dec. 2015. A semi-analytic
dynamical friction model that reproduces core stalling. MNRAS
454, 3778–3791.
Petts, J. A., Read, J. I., Gualandris, A., Nov. 2016. A semi-analytic
dynamical friction model for cored galaxies. MNRAS 463, 858–
869.
Pfeiﬂe, R. W., Satyapal, S., Manzano-King, C., Cann, J., Sexton,
R. O., Rothberg, B., Canalizo, G., Ricci, C., Blecha, L., Ellison,
S. L., Gliozzi, M., Secrest, N. J., Constantin, A., Harvey, J. B.,
Oct 2019a. A Triple AGN in a Mid-infrared Selected Late-stage
Galaxy Merger. ApJ 883 (2), 167.
Pfeiﬂe, R. W., Satyapal, S., Secrest, N. J., Gliozzi, M., Ricci, C.,
Ellison, S. L., Rothberg, B., Cann, J., Blecha, L., Williams, J. K.,
Constantin, A., Apr. 2019b. Buried Black Hole Growth in IR-
selected Mergers: New Results from Chandra. ApJ 875, 117.
Pﬁster, H., Bar-Or, B., Volonteri, M., Dubois, Y., Capelo, P. R., Sep
2019a. Tidal disruption event rates in galaxy merger remnants.
MNRAS 488 (1), L29–L34.
Pﬁster, H., Lupi, A., Capelo, P. R., Volonteri, M., Bellovary, J. M.,
Dotti, M., Nov. 2017. The birth of a supermassive black hole bi-
nary. MNRAS 471, 3646–3656.
Pﬁster, H., Volonteri, M., Dubois, Y., Dotti, M., Colpi, M., Jun
2019b. The erratic dynamical life of black hole seeds in high-
redshift galaxies. MNRAS 486 (1), 101–111.
Pﬂueger, B. J., Nguyen, K., Bogdanović, T., Eracleous, M., Run-
noe, J. C., Sigurdsson, S., Boroson, T., Jul. 2018. Likelihood for
Detection of Subparsec Supermassive Black Hole Binaries in Spec-
troscopic Surveys. ApJ 861, 59.
Piconcelli, E., Vignali, C., Bianchi, S., Mathur, S., Fiore, F.,
Guainazzi, M., Lanzuisi, G., Maiolino, R., Nicastro, F., Oct. 2010.
Witnessing the Key Early Phase of Quasar Evolution: An Ob-
scured Active Galactic Nucleus Pair in the Interacting Galaxy
IRAS 20210+1121. ApJ 722, L147–L151.
Pillepich, A., Springel, V., Nelson, D., Genel, S., Naiman, J., Pak-
mor, R., Hernquist, L., Torrey, P., Vogelsberger, M., Weinberger,
R., Marinacci, F., Jan. 2018. Simulating galaxy formation with
the IllustrisTNG model. MNRAS 473, 4077–4106.
Pilyugin, L. S., Zinchenko, I. A., Cedrés, B., Cepa, J., Bongiovanni,
A., Mattsson, L., Vílchez, J. M., Jan. 2012. SDSS galaxies with
double-peaked emission lines: double starbursts or active galactic
nuclei? MNRAS 419, 490–502.
Plavin, A. V., Kovalev, Y. Y., Petrov, L. Y., Feb. 2019. Dissecting
the AGN Disk–Jet System with Joint VLBI-Gaia Analysis. ApJ
871, 143.
Popović, L. Č., Feb 2012. Super-massive binary black holes and emis-
sion lines in active galactic nuclei. New A Rev. 56 (2-3), 74–91.
Prandoni, I., Seymour, N., Apr. 2015. Revealing the Physics and
Evolution of Galaxies and Galaxy Clusters with SKA Continuum
Surveys. Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Ar-
ray (AASKA14), 67.
Preto, M., Berentzen, I., Berczik, P., Spurzem, R., May 2011.
Fast Coalescence of Massive Black Hole Binaries from Mergers
of Galactic Nuclei: Implications for Low-frequency Gravitational-
wave Astrophysics. ApJ 732, L26.
Raﬁkov, R. R., Aug 2016. Accretion and Orbital Inspiral in Gas-
assisted Supermassive Black Hole Binary Mergers. ApJ 827 (2),
111.
Ragusa, E., Lodato, G., Price, D. J., Aug. 2016. Suppression of the
accretion rate in thin discs around binary black holes. MNRAS
460, 1243–1253.
Ranalli, P., Comastri, A., Vignali, C., Carrera, F. J., Cappelluti,
N., Gilli, R., Puccetti, S., Brand t, W. N., Brunner, H., Brusa,
M., Georgantopoulos, I., Iwasawa, K., Mainieri, V., Jul 2013. The
XMM deep survey in the CDF-S. III. Point source catalogue and
number counts in the hard X-rays. A&A 555, A42.
Reardon, D. J., Hobbs, G., Coles, W., Levin, Y., Keith, M. J., Bailes,
M., Bhat, N. D. R., Burke-Spolaor, S., Dai, S., Kerr, M., Lasky,
P. D., Manchester, R. N., Osłowski, S., Ravi, V., Shannon, R. M.,
van Straten, W., Toomey, L., Wang, J., Wen, L., You, X. P., Zhu,
X.-J., Jan. 2016. Timing analysis for 20 millisecond pulsars in the
Parkes Pulsar Timing Array. MNRAS 455, 1751–1769.
Reines, A. E., Greene, J. E., Geha, M., Oct. 2013. Dwarf Galaxies
with Optical Signatures of Active Massive Black Holes. ApJ 775,
116.
Remus, R.-S., Dolag, K., Naab, T., Burkert, A., Hirschmann, M.,
Hoﬀmann, T. L., Johansson, P. H., Jan. 2017. The co-evolution
of total density proﬁles and central dark matter fractions in sim-
ulated early-type galaxies. MNRAS 464, 3742–3756.
Ricarte, A., Tremmel, M., Natarajan, P., Quinn, T., Oct 2019. Trac-
ing black hole and galaxy co-evolution in the ROMULUS simula-
tions. MNRAS 489 (1), 802–819.
Ricci, C., Bauer, F. E., Treister, E., Schawinski, K., Privon, G. C.,
Blecha, L., Arevalo, P., Armus, L., Harrison, F., Ho, L. C., Iwa-
sawa, K., Sanders, D. B., Stern, D., Jun. 2017. Growing supermas-
sive black holes in the late stages of galaxy mergers are heavily
obscured. MNRAS 468, 1273–1299.
Ricci, C., Ueda, Y., Koss, M. J., Trakhtenbrot, B., Bauer, F. E.,
Gandhi, P., Dec. 2015. Compton-thick Accretion in the Local Uni-
verse. ApJ 815, L13.
Rieke, G. H., Ressler, M. E., Morrison, J. E., Bergeron, L., Bouchet,
P., García-Marín, M., Greene, T. P., Regan, M. W., Sukhatme,
K. G., Walker, H., Jul. 2015a. The Mid-Infrared Instrument for
the James Webb Space Telescope, VII: The MIRI Detectors. PASP
127, 665.
Rieke, G. H., Wright, G. S., Böker, T., Bouwman, J., Colina, L.,
Glasse, A., Gordon, K. D., Greene, T. P., Güdel, M., Henning, T.,
Justtanont, K., Lagage, P.-O., Meixner, M. E., Nørgaard-Nielsen,
H.-U., Ray, T. P., Ressler, M. E., van Dishoeck, E. F., Waelkens,
C., Jul. 2015b. The Mid-Infrared Instrument for the James Webb
Space Telescope, I: Introduction. PASP 127, 584.
Roberts, D. H., Cohen, J. P., Lu, J., Saripalli, L., Subrahmanyan, R.,
Sep 2015a. The Abundance of X-shaped Radio Sources. I. VLA
Survey of 52 Sources with Oﬀ-axis Distortions. ApJS 220 (1), 7.
Roberts, D. H., Saripalli, L., Subrahmanyan, R., Sep. 2015b. The
Abundance of X-shaped Radio Sources: Implications for the Grav-
itational Wave Background. ApJ 810, L6.
Rodriguez, C., Taylor, G. B., Zavala, R. T., Peck, A. B., Pollack,
L. K., Romani, R. W., Jul. 2006. A Compact Supermassive Binary
Black Hole System. ApJ 646, 49–60.
Roedig, C., Dotti, M., Sesana, A., Cuadra, J., Colpi, M., Aug. 2011.
Limiting eccentricity of subparsec massive black hole binaries sur-
rounded by self-gravitating gas discs. MNRAS 415, 3033–3041.
Roedig, C., Krolik, J. H., Miller, M. C., Apr. 2014. Observational
Signatures of Binary Supermassive Black Holes. ApJ 785, 115.
Roedig, C., Sesana, A., Apr 2014. Migration of massive black hole
binaries in self-gravitating discs: retrograde versus prograde. MN-
RAS 439 (4), 3476–3489.
Roedig, C., Sesana, A., Dotti, M., Cuadra, J., Amaro-Seoane, P.,
Haardt, F., Sep. 2012. Evolution of binary black holes in self grav-
itating discs. Dissecting the torques. A&A 545, A127.
Roelfsema, P. R., Shibai, H., Armus, L., Arrazola, D., Audard, M.,
Audley, M. D., Bradford, C. M., Charles, I., Dieleman, P., Doi,
Y., Duband, L., Eggens, M., Evers, J., Funaki, I., Gao, J. R.,
Giard, M., di Giorgio, A., González Fernández, L. M., Griﬃn,
M., Helmich, F. P., Hijmering, R., Huisman, R., Ishihara, D.,
Isobe, N., Jackson, B., Jacobs, H., Jellema, W., Kamp, I., Kaneda,
H., Kawada, M., Kemper, F., Kerschbaum, F., Khosropanah, P.,
Kohno, K., Kooijman, P. P., Krause, O., van der Kuur, J., Kwon,
J., Laauwen, W. M., de Lange, G., Larsson, B., van Loon, D.,
Madden, S. C., Matsuhara, H., Najarro, F., Nakagawa, T., Nay-
lor, D., Ogawa, H., Onaka, T., Oyabu, S., Poglitsch, A., Reveret,
V., Rodriguez, L., Spinoglio, L., Sakon, I., Sato, Y., Shinozaki, K.,
Shipman, R., Sugita, H., Suzuki, T., van der Tak, F. F. S., Torres
Redondo, J., Wada, T., Wang, S. Y., Wafelbakker, C. K., van
64
Weers, H., Withington, S., Vandenbussche, B., Yamada, T., Ya-
mamura, I., Aug 2018. SPICA-A Large Cryogenic Infrared Space
Telescope: Unveiling the Obscured Universe. PASA 35, e030.
Roos, N., Nov. 1988. Jet precession in active galaxies. ApJ 334, 95–
103.
Roos, N., Kaastra, J. S., Hummel, C. A., May 1993. A massive binary
black hole in 1928 + 738? ApJ 409, 130–133.
Rorai, A., Hennawi, J. F., Oñorbe, J., White, M., Prochaska, J. X.,
Kulkarni, G., Walther, M., Lukić, Z., Lee, K.-G., Apr. 2017. Mea-
surement of the small-scale structure of the intergalactic medium
using close quasar pairs. Science 356, 418–422.
Rosado, P. A., Sesana, A., Gair, J., Aug. 2015. Expected properties
of the ﬁrst gravitational wave signal detected with pulsar timing
arrays. MNRAS 451, 2417–2433.
Rosario, D. J., McGurk, R. C., Max, C. E., Shields, G. A., Smith,
K. L., Ammons, S. M., Sep 2011. Adaptive Optics Imaging of
Quasi-stellar Objects with Double-peaked Narrow Lines:
Are
They Dual Active Galactic Nuclei? ApJ 739 (1), 44.
Rosario, D. J., Shields, G. A., Taylor, G. B., Salviand er, S., Smith,
K. L., Jun 2010. The Jet-driven Outﬂow in the Radio Galaxy
SDSS J1517+3353: Implications for Double-peaked Narrow-line
Active Galactic Nucleus. ApJ 716 (1), 131–143.
Rosas-Guevara, Y. M., Bower, R. G., McAlpine, S., Bonoli, S., Tis-
sera, P. B., Feb 2019. The abundances and properties of Dual
AGN and their host galaxies in the EAGLE simulations. MNRAS
483 (2), 2712–2720.
Rosas-Guevara, Y. M., Bower, R. G., Schaye, J., Furlong, M., Frenk,
C. S., Booth, C. M., Crain, R. A., Dalla Vecchia, C., Schaller,
M., Theuns, T., Nov. 2015. The impact of angular momentum
on black hole accretion rates in simulations of galaxy formation.
MNRAS 454, 1038–1057.
Rosswog, S., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., Hix, W. R., Apr. 2009. Tidal Disrup-
tion and Ignition of White Dwarfs by Moderately Massive Black
Holes. ApJ 695, 404–419.
Roškar, R., Fiacconi, D., Mayer, L., Kazantzidis, S., Quinn, T. R.,
Wadsley, J., May 2015. Orbital decay of supermassive black hole
binaries in clumpy multiphase merger remnants. MNRAS 449,
494–505.
Rovilos, E., Georgantopoulos, I., Akylas, A., Aird, J., Alexander,
D. M., Comastri, A., Del Moro, A., Gandhi, P., Georgakakis, A.,
Harrison, C. M., Mullaney, J. R., Feb. 2014. A wide search for
obscured active galactic nuclei using XMM-Newton and WISE.
MNRAS 438, 494–512.
Runnoe, J. C., Eracleous, M., Mathes, G., Pennell, A., Boroson,
T., Sigurdsson, S., Bogdanović, T., Halpern, J. P., Liu, J., Nov.
2015. A Large Systematic Search for Close Supermassive Binary
and Rapidly Recoiling Black Holes. II. Continued Spectroscopic
Monitoring and Optical Flux Variability. ApJS 221, 7.
Runnoe, J. C., Eracleous, M., Pennell, A., Mathes, G., Boroson, T.,
Sigurdsson, S., Bogdanović, T., Halpern, J. P., Liu, J., Brown, S.,
Jun. 2017. A large systematic search for close supermassive binary
and rapidly recoiling black holes - III. Radial velocity variations.
MNRAS 468, 1683–1702.
Ryu, T., Perna, R., Haiman, Z., Ostriker, J. P., Stone, N. C., Jan.
2018. Interactions between multiple supermassive black holes in
galactic nuclei: a solution to the ﬁnal parsec problem. MNRAS
473, 3410–3433.
Salcido, J., Bower, R. G., Theuns, T., McAlpine, S., Schaller, M.,
Crain, R. A., Schaye, J., Regan, J., Nov. 2016. Music from the
heavens - gravitational waves from supermassive black hole merg-
ers in the EAGLE simulations. MNRAS 463, 870–885.
Sánchez, S. F., Kennicutt, R. C., Gil de Paz, A., van de Ven, G.,
Vílchez, J. M., Wisotzki, L., Walcher, C. J., Mast, D., Aguerri,
J. A. L., Albiol-Pérez, S., Alonso-Herrero, A., Alves, J., Bakos, J.,
Bartáková, T., Bland-Hawthorn, J., Boselli, A., Bomans, D. J.,
Castillo-Morales, A., Cortijo-Ferrero, C., de Lorenzo-Cáceres, A.,
Del Olmo, A., Dettmar, R.-J., Díaz, A., Ellis, S., Falcón-Barroso,
J., Flores, H., Gallazzi, A., García-Lorenzo, B., González Del-
gado, R., Gruel, N., Haines, T., Hao, C., Husemann, B., Iglésias-
Páramo, J., Jahnke, K., Johnson, B., Jungwiert, B., Kalinova,
V., Kehrig, C., Kupko, D., López-Sánchez, Á. R., Lyubenova,
M., Marino, R. A., Mármol-Queraltó, E., Márquez, I., Masegosa,
J., Meidt, S., Mendez-Abreu, J., Monreal-Ibero, A., Montijo, C.,
Mourão, A. M., Palacios-Navarro, G., Papaderos, P., Pasquali,
A., Peletier, R., Pérez, E., Pérez, I., Quirrenbach, A., Relaño,
M., Rosales-Ortega, F. F., Roth, M. M., Ruiz-Lara, T., Sánchez-
Blázquez, P., Sengupta, C., Singh, R., Stanishev, V., Trager, S. C.,
Vazdekis, A., Viironen, K., Wild, V., Zibetti, S., Ziegler, B., Feb.
2012. CALIFA, the Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area survey.
I. Survey presentation. A&A 538, A8.
Sanders, D. B., Mirabel, I. F., Jan. 1996. Luminous Infrared Galax-
ies. Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 34, 749.
Sanders, D. B., Soifer, B. T., Elias, J. H., Madore, B. F., Matthews,
K., Neugebauer, G., Scoville, N. Z., Feb 1988. Ultraluminous In-
frared Galaxies and the Origin of Quasars. ApJ 325, 74.
Sandrinelli, A., Covino, S., Dotti, M., Treves, A., Mar. 2016. Quasi-
periodicities at Year-like Timescales in Blazars. AJ 151, 54.
Sandrinelli, A., Covino, S., Treves, A., Holgado, A. M., Sesana, A.,
Lindfors, E., Ramazani, V. F., Jul 2018a. Quasi-periodicities of
BL Lacertae objects. A&A 615, A118.
Sandrinelli, A., Falomo, R., Treves, A., Farina, E. P., Uslenghi, M.,
Oct. 2014. The environment of low-redshift quasar pairs. MNRAS
444, 1835–1841.
Sandrinelli, A., Falomo, R., Treves, A., Scarpa, R., Uslenghi, M.,
Mar. 2018b. Overdensity of galaxies in the environment of quasar
pairs. MNRAS 474, 4925–4936.
Saripalli, L., Roberts, D. H., Jan. 2018. What Are X-shaped Radio
Sources Telling Us? II. Properties of a Sample of 87. ApJ 852, 48.
Sathyaprakash, B. S., Schutz, B. F., Mar 2009. Physics, Astrophysics
and Cosmology with Gravitational Waves. Living Reviews in Rel-
ativity 12 (1), 2.
Satyapal, S., Abel, N. P., Secrest, N. J., May 2018. Star-forming
Galaxies as AGN Imposters? A Theoretical Investigation of the
Mid-infrared Colors of AGNs and Extreme Starbursts. ApJ 858,
38.
Satyapal, S., Ellison, S. L., McAlpine, W., Hickox, R. C., Patton,
D. R., Mendel, J. T., Jun. 2014. Galaxy pairs in the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey - IX. Merger-induced AGN activity as traced by the
Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer. MNRAS 441, 1297–1304.
Satyapal, S., Secrest, N. J., Ricci, C., Ellison, S. L., Rothberg, B.,
Blecha, L., Constantin, A., Gliozzi, M., McNulty, P., Ferguson,
J., Oct. 2017. Buried AGNs in Advanced Mergers: Mid-infrared
Color Selection as a Dual AGN Candidate Finder. ApJ 848, 126.
Saxton, R. D., Read, A. M., Esquej, P., Komossa, S., Dougherty,
S., Rodriguez-Pascual, P., Barrado, D., May 2012. A tidal
disruption-like X-ray ﬂare from the quiescent galaxy SDSS
J120136.02+300305.5. A&A 541, A106.
Schaye, J., Crain, R. A., Bower, R. G., Furlong, M., Schaller, M.,
Theuns, T., Dalla Vecchia, C., Frenk, C. S., McCarthy, I. G.,
Helly, J. C., Jenkins, A., Rosas-Guevara, Y. M., White, S. D. M.,
Baes, M., Booth, C. M., Camps, P., Navarro, J. F., Qu, Y., Rah-
mati, A., Sawala, T., Thomas, P. A., Trayford, J., Jan. 2015.
The EAGLE project: simulating the evolution and assembly of
galaxies and their environments. MNRAS 446, 521–554.
Schaye, J., Dalla Vecchia, C., Jan. 2008. On the relation between
the Schmidt and Kennicutt-Schmidt star formation laws and its
implications for numerical simulations. MNRAS 383, 1210–1222.
Sesana, A., Gair, J., Berti, E., Volonteri, M., Feb. 2011a. Recon-
structing the massive black hole cosmic history through gravita-
tional waves. Phys. Rev. D 83 (4), 044036.
Sesana, A., Gualandris, A., Dotti, M., Jul. 2011b. Massive black
hole binary eccentricity in rotating stellar systems. MNRAS 415,
L35–L39.
Sesana, A., Haiman, Z., Kocsis, B., Kelley, L. Z., Mar. 2018. Testing
the Binary Hypothesis: Pulsar Timing Constraints on Supermas-
sive Black Hole Binary Candidates. ApJ 856, 42.
Sesana, A., Roedig, C., Reynolds, M. T., Dotti, M., Feb 2012a. Mul-
timessenger astronomy with pulsar timing and X-ray observations
of massive black hole binaries. MNRAS 420 (1), 860–877.
Sesana, A., Roedig, C., Reynolds, M. T., Dotti, M., Feb. 2012b. Mul-
timessenger astronomy with pulsar timing and X-ray observations
of massive black hole binaries. MNRAS 420, 860–877.
65
Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., May 2010. Measuring the parameters of
massive black hole binary systems with pulsar timing array obser-
vations of gravitational waves. Phys. Rev. D 81 (10), 104008.
Sesana, A., Vecchio, A., Colacino, C. N., Oct. 2008. The stochas-
tic gravitational-wave background from massive black hole binary
systems: implications for observations with Pulsar Timing Arrays.
MNRAS 390, 192–209.
Severgnini, P., Cicone, C., Della Ceca, R., Braito, V., Caccianiga,
A., Ballo, L., Campana, S., Moretti, A., La Parola, V., Vignali,
C., Zaino, A., Matzeu, G. A., Landoni, M., Sep. 2018. Swift data
hint at a binary supermassive black hole candidate at sub-parsec
separation. MNRAS 479, 3804–3813.
Shakura, N. I., Sunyaev, R. A., 1973. Black holes in binary systems.
Observational appearance. A&A 24, 337–355.
Shappee, B. J., Prieto, J. L., Grupe, D., Kochanek, C. S., Stanek,
K. Z., De Rosa, G., Mathur, S., Zu, Y., Peterson, B. M., Pogge,
R. W., Komossa, S., Im, M., Jencson, J., Holoien, T. W.-S., Basu,
U., Beacom, J. F., Szczygieł, D. M., Brimacombe, J., Adams, S.,
Campillay, A., Choi, C., Contreras, C., Dietrich, M., Dubberley,
M., Elphick, M., Foale, S., Giustini, M., Gonzalez, C., Hawkins,
E., Howell, D. A., Hsiao, E. Y., Koss, M., Leighly, K. M., Morrell,
N., Mudd, D., Mullins, D., Nugent, J. M., Parrent, J., Phillips,
M. M., Pojmanski, G., Rosing, W., Ross, R., Sand, D., Terndrup,
D. M., Valenti, S., Walker, Z., Yoon, Y., Jun. 2014. The Man be-
hind the Curtain: X-Rays Drive the UV through NIR Variability
in the 2013 Active Galactic Nucleus Outburst in NGC 2617. ApJ
788, 48.
Shen, Y., Liu, X., Loeb, A., Tremaine, S., Sep. 2013. Constrain-
ing Sub-parsec Binary Supermassive Black Holes in Quasars with
Multi-epoch Spectroscopy. I. The General Quasar Population. ApJ
775, 49.
Shen, Y., Loeb, A., Dec. 2010. Identifying Supermassive Black Hole
Binaries with Broad Emission Line Diagnosis. ApJ 725, 249–260.
Shi, J.-M., Krolik, J. H., Jul. 2015. Three-dimensional MHD Simu-
lation of Circumbinary Accretion Disks. II. Net Accretion Rate.
ApJ 807, 131.
Shi, J.-M., Krolik, J. H., Lubow, S. H., Hawley, J. F., Apr.
2012. Three-dimensional Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of
Circumbinary Accretion Disks: Disk Structures and Angular Mo-
mentum Transport. ApJ 749, 118.
Shi, Z.-X., Luo, A.-L., Comte, G., Chen, X.-Y., Wei, P., Zhao, Y.-
H., Wu, F.-C., Zhang, Y.-X., Shen, S.-Y., Yang, M., Wu, H.,
Wu, X.-B., Zhang, H.-T., Lei, Y.-J., Zhang, J.-N., Wang, T.-G.,
Jin, G., Zhang, Y., Oct. 2014. A search for double-peaked narrow
emission line galaxies and AGNs in the LAMOST DR1. Research
in Astronomy and Astrophysics 14, 1234–1250.
Sijacki, D., Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Springel, V., Torrey, P.,
Snyder, G. F., Nelson, D., Hernquist, L., Sep 2015. The Illustris
simulation: the evolving population of black holes across cosmic
time. MNRAS 452 (1), 575–596.
Silk, J., Rees, M. J., Mar. 1998. Quasars and galaxy formation. A&A
331, L1–L4.
Sillanpaa, A., Haarala, S., Valtonen, M. J., Sundelius, B., Byrd,
G. G., Feb. 1988. OJ 287 - Binary pair of supermassive black
holes. ApJ 325, 628–634.
Silverman, J. D., Kampczyk, P., Jahnke, K., Andrae, R., Lilly, S. J.,
Elvis, M., Civano, F., Mainieri, V., Vignali, C., Zamorani, G.,
Nair, P., Le Fèvre, O., de Ravel, L., Bardelli, S., Bongiorno, A.,
Bolzonella, M., Cappi, A., Caputi, K., Carollo, C. M., Contini,
T., Coppa, G., Cucciati, O., de la Torre, S., Franzetti, P., Garilli,
B., Halliday, C., Hasinger, G., Iovino, A., Knobel, C., Koekemoer,
A. M., Kovač, K., Lamareille, F., Le Borgne, J.-F., Le Brun, V.,
Maier, C., Mignoli, M., Pello, R., Pérez-Montero, E., Ricciardelli,
E., Peng, Y., Scodeggio, M., Tanaka, M., Tasca, L., Tresse, L.,
Vergani, D., Zucca, E., Brusa, M., Cappelluti, N., Comastri, A.,
Finoguenov, A., Fu, H., Gilli, R., Hao, H., Ho, L. C., Salvato, M.,
Dec. 2011. The Impact of Galaxy Interactions on Active Galactic
Nucleus Activity in zCOSMOS. ApJ 743, 2.
Smith, K. L., Shields, G. A., Bonning, E. W., McMullen, C. C.,
Rosario, D. J., Salviander, S., Jun. 2010. A Search for Binary
Active Galactic Nuclei: Double-peaked [O III] AGNs in the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey. ApJ 716, 866–877.
Smolcic, V., Padovani, P., Delhaize, J., Prandoni, I., Seymour, N.,
Jarvis, M., Afonso, J., Magliocchetti, M., Huynh, M., Vaccari, M.,
Karim, A., Apr. 2015. Exploring AGN Activity over Cosmic Time
with the SKA. Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre
Array (AASKA14), 69.
Sokołowska, A., Capelo, P. R., Fall, S. M., Mayer, L., Shen, S.,
Bonoli, S., Feb. 2017. Galactic Angular Momentum in Cosmolog-
ical Zoom-in Simulations. I. Disk and Bulge Components and the
Galaxy-Halo Connection. ApJ 835, 289.
Solanes, J. M., Perea, J. D., Valentí-Rojas, G., del Olmo, A.,
Márquez, I., Ramos Almeida, C., Tous, J. L., Apr 2019. Intrinsic
and observed dual AGN fractions from major mergers. A&A 624,
A86.
Souza Lima, R., Mayer, L., Capelo, P. R., Bellovary, J. M., Mar.
2017. The Pairing of Accreting Massive Black Holes in Multiphase
Circumnuclear Disks: the Interplay Between Radiative Cooling,
Star Formation, and Feedback Processes. ApJ 838, 13.
Springel, V., Di Matteo, T., Hernquist, L., Aug. 2005. Modelling
feedback from stars and black holes in galaxy mergers. MNRAS
361, 776–794.
Springel, V., Hernquist, L., Jul. 2002. Cosmological smoothed par-
ticle hydrodynamics simulations: the entropy equation. MNRAS
333, 649–664.
Springel, V., Pakmor, R., Pillepich, A., Weinberger, R., Nelson, D.,
Hernquist, L., Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Torrey, P., Marinacci,
F., Naiman, J., Mar 2018. First results from the IllustrisTNG
simulations: matter and galaxy clustering. MNRAS 475 (1), 676–
698.
Steidel, C. C., Rudie, G. C., Strom, A. L., Pettini, M., Reddy,
N. A., Shapley, A. E., Trainor, R. F., Erb, D. K., Turner, M. L.,
Konidaris, N. P., Kulas, K. R., Mace, G., Matthews, K., McLean,
I. S., Nov. 2014. Strong Nebular Line Ratios in the Spectra of z∼2-
3 Star Forming Galaxies: First Results from KBSS-MOSFIRE.
ApJ 795, 165.
Steinborn, L. K., Dolag, K., Comerford, J. M., Hirschmann, M.,
Remus, R.-S., Teklu, A. F., May 2016. Origin and properties of
dual and oﬀset active galactic nuclei in a cosmological simulation
at z=2. MNRAS 458, 1013–1028.
Steinborn, L. K., Dolag, K., Hirschmann, M., Prieto, M. A., Remus,
R.-S., Apr. 2015. A reﬁned sub-grid model for black hole accretion
and AGN feedback in large cosmological simulations. MNRAS 448,
1504–1525.
Stern, D., Assef, R. J., Benford, D. J., Blain, A., Cutri, R., Dey,
A., Eisenhardt, P., Griﬃth, R. L., Jarrett, T. H., Lake, S., Masci,
F., Petty, S., Stanford, S. A., Tsai, C.-W., Wright, E. L., Yan,
L., Harrison, F., Madsen, K., Jul. 2012. Mid-infrared Selection
of Active Galactic Nuclei with the Wide-Field Infrared Survey
Explorer. I. Characterizing WISE-selected Active Galactic Nuclei
in COSMOS. ApJ 753, 30.
Stinson, G., Seth, A., Katz, N., Wadsley, J., Governato, F., Quinn,
T., Dec. 2006. Star formation and feedback in smoothed parti-
cle hydrodynamic simulations - I. Isolated galaxies. MNRAS 373,
1074–1090.
Storchi-Bergmann, T., Schimoia, J. S., Peterson, B. M., Elvis, M.,
Denney, K. D., Eracleous, M., Nemmen, R. S., Feb. 2017. Double-
Peaked Proﬁles:
Ubiquitous Signatures of Disks in the Broad
Emission Lines of Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 835, 236.
Sun, L., Zhou, H., Hao, L., Jiang, P., Ge, J., Ji, T., Ma, J., Zhang,
S., Shu, X., Feb. 2016. Keck/ESI Long-slit Spectroscopy of SBS
1421+511: A Recoiling Quasar Nucleus in an Active Galaxy Pair?
ApJ 818, 64.
Syer, D., Clarke, C. J., Dec. 1995. Satellites in discs: regulating the
accretion luminosity. MNRAS 277, 758–766.
Tacconi, L. J., Neri, R., Genzel, R., Combes, F., Bolatto, A., Cooper,
M. C., Wuyts, S., Bournaud, F., Burkert, A., Comerford, J., Cox,
P., Davis, M., Förster Schreiber, N. M., García-Burillo, S., Gracia-
Carpio, J., Lutz, D., Naab, T., Newman, S., Omont, A., Sain-
tonge, A., Shapiro Griﬃn, K., Shapley, A., Sternberg, A., Weiner,
B., May 2013. Phibss: Molecular Gas Content and Scaling Re-
lations in z ˜ 1-3 Massive, Main-sequence Star-forming Galaxies.
66
ApJ 768, 74.
Tamanini, N., Caprini, C., Barausse, E., Sesana, A., Klein, A., Pe-
titeau, A., Apr. 2016. Science with the space-based interferometer
eLISA. III: probing the expansion of the universe using gravita-
tional wave standard sirens. J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 4, 002.
Tamburello, V., Capelo, P. R., Mayer, L., Bellovary, J. M., Wadsley,
J. W., Jan. 2017. Supermassive black hole pairs in clumpy galaxies
at high redshift: delayed binary formation and concurrent mass
growth. MNRAS 464, 2952–2962.
Tamfal, T., Capelo, P. R., Kazantzidis, S., Mayer, L., Potter, D.,
Stadel, J., Widrow, L. M., Sep. 2018. Formation of LISA Black
Hole Binaries in Merging Dwarf Galaxies: The Imprint of Dark
Matter. ApJ 864, L19.
Tang,
S.,
Grindlay,
J.,
Oct
2009.
The
Quasar
SDSS
J153636.22+044127.0:
A Double-Peaked Emitter in a Can-
didate Binary Black Hole System. ApJ 704 (2), 1189–1194.
Tang, Y., Haiman, Z., MacFadyen, A., May 2018. The late inspiral
of supermassive black hole binaries with circumbinary gas discs in
the LISA band. MNRAS 476, 2249–2257.
Tang, Y., MacFadyen, A., Haiman, Z., Aug. 2017. On the orbital
evolution of supermassive black hole binaries with circumbinary
accretion discs. MNRAS 469, 4258–4267.
Tavani, M., Cavaliere, A., Munar-Adrover, P., Argan, A., Feb. 2018.
The Blazar PG 1553+113 as a Binary System of Supermassive
Black Holes. ApJ 854, 11.
Terashima, Y., Wilson, A. S., Jan. 2003. Chandra Snapshot Observa-
tions of Low-Luminosity Active Galactic Nuclei with a Compact
Radio Source. ApJ 583, 145–158.
Terquem, C., Papaloizou, J. C. B., Jan. 2017. On the energy dissi-
pation rate at the inner edge of circumbinary discs. MNRAS 464,
2429–2440.
Thorne, K. S., 1987. Gravitational radiation. pp. 330–458.
Tollet, E., Macciò, A. V., Dutton, A. A., Stinson, G. S., Wang,
L., Penzo, C., Gutcke, T. A., Buck, T., Kang, X., Brook, C.,
Di Cintio, A., Keller, B. W., Wadsley, J., Mar. 2016. NIHAO -
IV: core creation and destruction in dark matter density proﬁles
across cosmic time. MNRAS 456, 3542–3552.
Toomre, A., Toomre, J., Dec. 1972. Galactic Bridges and Tails. ApJ
178, 623–666.
Tornatore, L., Borgani, S., Dolag, K., Matteucci, F., Dec. 2007.
Chemical enrichment of galaxy clusters from hydrodynamical sim-
ulations. MNRAS 382, 1050–1072.
Tornatore, L., Borgani, S., Springel, V., Matteucci, F., Menci, N.,
Murante, G., Jul. 2003. Cooling and heating the intracluster
medium in hydrodynamical simulations. MNRAS 342, 1025–1040.
Torres-Albà, N., Iwasawa, K., Díaz-Santos, T., Charmandaris, V.,
Ricci, C., Chu, J. K., Sanders, D. B., Armus, L., Barcos-Muñoz,
L., Evans, A. S., Howell, J. H., Inami, H., Linden, S. T., Medling,
A. M., Privon, G. C., U, V., Yoon, I., Dec. 2018. C-GOALS. II.
Chandra observations of the lower luminosity sample of nearby
luminous infrared galaxies in GOALS. A&A 620, A140.
Treister, E., Messias, H., Privon, G. C., Nagar, N., Medling, A. M.,
U., V., Bauer, F. E., Cicone, C., Barcos Munoz, L., Evans, A. S.,
Muller-Sanchez, F., Comerford, J. M., Armus, L., Chang, C.,
Koss, M., Venturi, G., Schawinski, K., Casey, C., Urry, C. M.,
Sanders, D. B., Scoville, N., Sheth, K., Jan 2020. The Molecu-
lar Gas in the NGC 6240 Merging Galaxy System at the Highest
Spatial Resolution. arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2001.00601.
Treister, E., Schawinski, K., Urry, C. M., Simmons, B. D., Oct. 2012.
Major Galaxy Mergers Only Trigger the Most Luminous Active
Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 758, L39.
Tremmel, M., Governato, F., Volonteri, M., Pontzen, A., Quinn,
T. R., Apr 2018. Wandering Supermassive Black Holes in Milky-
Way-mass Halos. ApJ 857 (2), L22.
Tremmel, M., Governato, F., Volonteri, M., Quinn, T. R., Aug. 2015.
Oﬀthe beaten path: a new approach to realistically model the or-
bital decay of supermassive black holes in galaxy formation simu-
lations. MNRAS 451, 1868–1874.
Tremmel, M., Karcher, M., Governato, F., Volonteri, M., Quinn,
T. R., Pontzen, A., Anderson, L., Bellovary, J., Sep. 2017. The
Romulus cosmological simulations:
a physical approach to the
formation, dynamics and accretion models of SMBHs. MNRAS
470, 1121–1139.
Trump, J. R., Konidaris, N. P., Barro, G., Koo, D. C., Kocevski,
D. D., Juneau, S., Weiner, B. J., Faber, S. M., McLean, I. S.,
Yan, R., Pérez-González, P. G., Villar, V., Jan. 2013. Testing
Diagnostics of Nuclear Activity and Star Formation in Galaxies
at z>1. ApJ 763, L6.
Trump, J. R., Sun, M., Zeimann, G. R., Luck, C., Bridge, J. S., Grier,
C. J., Hagen, A., Juneau, S., Montero-Dorta, A., Rosario, D. J.,
Brandt, W. N., Ciardullo, R., Schneider, D. P., Sep. 2015. The
Biases of Optical Line-Ratio Selection for Active Galactic Nuclei
and the Intrinsic Relationship between Black Hole Accretion and
Galaxy Star Formation. ApJ 811, 26.
Tsalmantza, P., Decarli, R., Dotti, M., Hogg, D. W., Sep. 2011. A
Systematic Search for Massive Black Hole Binaries in the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey Spectroscopic Sample. ApJ 738, 20.
Urrutia, T., Lacy, M., Becker, R. H., Feb 2008. Evidence for Quasar
Activity Triggered by Galaxy Mergers in HST Observations of
Dust-reddened Quasars. ApJ 674 (1), 80–96.
Valtonen, M., Pihajoki, P., Sep. 2013. A helical jet model for OJ287.
A&A 557, A28.
Valtonen, M. J., Apr. 2007. New Orbit Solutions for the Precessing
Binary Black Hole Model of OJ 287. ApJ 659, 1074–1081.
Valtonen, M. J., Ciprini, S., Lehto, H. J., Nov 2012. On the masses
of OJ287 black holes. MNRAS 427 (1), 77–83.
Valtonen, M. J., Lehto, H. J., Nilsson, K., Heidt, J., Takalo, L. O.,
Sillanpää, A., Villforth, C., Kidger, M., Poyner, G., Pursimo,
T., Zola, S., Wu, J.-H., Zhou, X., Sadakane, K., Drozdz, M.,
Koziel, D., Marchev, D., Ogloza, W., Porowski, C., Siwak, M.,
Stachowski, G., Winiarski, M., Hentunen, V.-P., Nissinen, M., Li-
akos, A., Dogru, S., Apr. 2008. A massive binary black-hole system
in OJ287 and a test of general relativity. Nature 452, 851–853.
Van Wassenhove, S., Capelo, P. R., Volonteri, M., Dotti, M.,
Bellovary, J. M., Mayer, L., Governato, F., Mar. 2014. Nuclear
coups: dynamics of black holes in galaxy mergers. MNRAS 439,
474–487.
Van Wassenhove, S., Volonteri, M., Mayer, L., Dotti, M., Bellovary,
J., Callegari, S., Mar. 2012. Observability of Dual Active Galactic
Nuclei in Merging Galaxies. ApJ 748, L7.
VanderPlas, J. T., Ivezić, Ž., Oct. 2015. Periodograms for Multiband
Astronomical Time Series. ApJ 812, 18.
Vasiliev, E., Antonini, F., Merritt, D., Apr. 2014. The Final-parsec
Problem in Nonspherical Galaxies Revisited. ApJ 785, 163.
Vasiliev, E., Antonini, F., Merritt, D., Sep 2015. The Final-parsec
Problem in the Collisionless Limit. ApJ 810 (1), 49.
Vaughan, S., Uttley, P., Markowitz, A. G., Huppenkothen, D., Mid-
dleton, M. J., Alston, W. N., Scargle, J. D., Farr, W. M., Sep.
2016. False periodicities in quasar time-domain surveys. MNRAS
461, 3145–3152.
Veilleux, S., Osterbrock, D. E., Feb. 1987. Spectral classiﬁcation of
emission-line galaxies. ApJS 63, 295–310.
Veilleux, S., Rupke, D. S. N., Kim, D. C., Genzel, R., Sturm, E.,
Lutz, D., Contursi, A., Schweitzer, M., Tacconi, L. J., Netzer, H.,
Sternberg, A., Mihos, J. C., Baker, A. J., Mazzarella, J. M., Lord,
S., Sanders, D. B., Stockton, A., Joseph, R. D., Barnes, J. E.,
Jun 2009. Spitzer Quasar and Ulirg Evolution Study (QUEST).
IV. Comparison of 1 Jy Ultraluminous Infrared Galaxies with
Palomar-Green Quasars. ApJS 182 (2), 628–666.
Verbiest, J. P. W., Lentati, L., Hobbs, G., van Haasteren, R., Demor-
est, P. B., Janssen, G. H., Wang, J.-B., Desvignes, G., Caballero,
R. N., Keith, M. J., Champion, D. J., Arzoumanian, Z., Babak,
S., Bassa, C. G., Bhat, N. D. R., Brazier, A., Brem, P., Burgay,
M., Burke-Spolaor, S., Chamberlin, S. J., Chatterjee, S., Christy,
B., Cognard, I., Cordes, J. M., Dai, S., Dolch, T., Ellis, J. A.,
Ferdman, R. D., Fonseca, E., Gair, J. R., Garver-Daniels, N. E.,
Gentile, P., Gonzalez, M. E., Graikou, E., Guillemot, L., Hes-
sels, J. W. T., Jones, G., Karuppusamy, R., Kerr, M., Kramer,
M., Lam, M. T., Lasky, P. D., Lassus, A., Lazarus, P., Lazio,
T. J. W., Lee, K. J., Levin, L., Liu, K., Lynch, R. S., Lyne, A. G.,
Mckee, J., McLaughlin, M. A., McWilliams, S. T., Madison, D. R.,
Manchester, R. N., Mingarelli, C. M. F., Nice, D. J., Osłowski, S.,
67
Palliyaguru, N. T., Pennucci, T. T., Perera, B. B. P., Perrodin, D.,
Possenti, A., Petiteau, A., Ransom, S. M., Reardon, D., Rosado,
P. A., Sanidas, S. A., Sesana, A., Shaifullah, G., Shannon, R. M.,
Siemens, X., Simon, J., Smits, R., Spiewak, R., Stairs, I. H., Stap-
pers, B. W., Stinebring, D. R., Stovall, K., Swiggum, J. K., Taylor,
S. R., Theureau, G., Tiburzi, C., Toomey, L., Vallisneri, M., van
Straten, W., Vecchio, A., Wang, Y., Wen, L., You, X. P., Zhu,
W. W., Zhu, X.-J., May 2016. The International Pulsar Timing
Array: First data release. MNRAS 458, 1267–1288.
Vignali, C., Piconcelli, E., Perna, M., Hennawi, J., Gilli, R., Comas-
tri, A., Zamorani, G., Dotti, M., Mathur, S., Jun. 2018. Probing
black hole accretion in quasar pairs at high redshift. MNRAS 477,
780–790.
Villforth, C., Hamann, F., Mar. 2015. The Host Galaxies and
Narrow-Line Regions of Four Double-Peaked [OIII] AGNs. AJ 149,
92.
Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Sijacki, D., Torrey, P., Springel, V.,
Hernquist, L., Dec. 2013. A model for cosmological simulations of
galaxy formation physics. MNRAS 436, 3031–3067.
Vogelsberger, M., Genel, S., Springel, V., Torrey, P., Sijacki, D., Xu,
D., Snyder, G., Nelson, D., Hernquist, L., Oct. 2014. Introducing
the Illustris Project: simulating the coevolution of dark and visible
matter in the Universe. MNRAS 444, 1518–1547.
Voges, W., Aschenbach, B., Boller, T., Bräuninger, H., Briel, U.,
Burkert, W., Dennerl, K., Englhauser, J., Gruber, R., Haberl, F.,
Hartner, G., Hasinger, G., Kürster, M., Pfeﬀermann, E., Pietsch,
W., Predehl, P., Rosso, C., Schmitt, J. H. M. M., Trümper, J.,
Zimmermann, H. U., Sep. 1999. The ROSAT all-sky survey bright
source catalogue. A&A 349, 389–405.
Volonteri, M., Capelo, P. R., Netzer, H., Bellovary, J., Dotti, M.,
Governato, F., Sep. 2015a. Black hole accretion versus star forma-
tion rate: theory confronts observations. MNRAS 452, L6–L10.
Volonteri, M., Capelo, P. R., Netzer, H., Bellovary, J., Dotti, M.,
Governato, F., May 2015b. Growing black holes and galaxies:
black hole accretion versus star formation rate. MNRAS 449,
1470–1485.
Volonteri, M., Dubois, Y., Pichon, C., Devriendt, J., Aug. 2016.
The cosmic evolution of massive black holes in the Horizon-AGN
simulation. MNRAS 460, 2979–2996.
Volonteri, M., Haardt, F., Madau, P., Jan 2003. The Assembly and
Merging History of Supermassive Black Holes in Hierarchical Mod-
els of Galaxy Formation. ApJ 582 (2), 559–573.
Volonteri, M., Miller, J. M., Dotti, M., Sep. 2009. Sub-Parsec Super-
massive Binary Quasars: Expectations at z < 1. ApJ 703, L86–
L89.
Volonteri,
M.,
Perna,
R.,
Apr 2005. Dynamical evolution of
intermediate-mass black holes and their observable signatures in
the nearby Universe. MNRAS 358 (3), 913–922.
Wang, J.-M., Chen, Y.-M., Hu, C., Mao, W.-M., Zhang, S., Bian,
W.-H., Nov. 2009. Active Galactic Nuclei with Double-Peaked
Narrow Lines: Are they Dual Active Galactic Nuclei? ApJ 705,
L76–L80.
Wang, L., Greene, J. E., Ju, W., Raﬁkov, R. R., Ruan, J. J., Schnei-
der, D. P., Jan. 2017. Searching for Binary Supermassive Black
Holes via Variable Broad Emission Line Shifts: Low Binary Frac-
tion. ApJ 834, 129.
Ward, W. R., Apr. 1997. Protoplanet Migration by Nebula Tides.
Icarus 126, 261–281.
Weinberger, R., Springel, V., Hernquist, L., Pillepich, A., Mari-
nacci, F., Pakmor, R., Nelson, D., Genel, S., Vogelsberger, M.,
Naiman, J., Torrey, P., Mar. 2017. Simulating galaxy formation
with black hole driven thermal and kinetic feedback. MNRAS 465,
3291–3308.
Weinberger, R., Springel, V., Pakmor, R., Nelson, D., Genel, S.,
Pillepich, A., Vogelsberger, M., Marinacci, F., Naiman, J., Torrey,
P., Hernquist, L., Sep 2018. Supermassive black holes and their
feedback eﬀects in the IllustrisTNG simulation. MNRAS 479 (3),
4056–4072.
Weston, M. E., McIntosh, D. H., Brodwin, M., Mann, J., Cooper,
A., McConnell, A., Nielsen, J. L., Feb. 2017. Incidence of WISE
-selected obscured AGNs in major mergers and interactions from
the SDSS. MNRAS 464, 3882–3906.
Wills, B. J., Browne, I. W. A., Mar. 1986. Relativistic beaming and
quasar emission lines. ApJ 302, 56–63.
Wisnioski, E., Förster Schreiber, N. M., Wuyts, S., Wuyts, E., Ban-
dara, K., Wilman, D., Genzel, R., Bender, R., Davies, R., Fossati,
M., Lang, P., Mendel, J. T., Beiﬁori, A., Brammer, G., Chan,
J., Fabricius, M., Fudamoto, Y., Kulkarni, S., Kurk, J., Lutz, D.,
Nelson, E. J., Momcheva, I., Rosario, D., Saglia, R., Seitz, S., Tac-
coni, L. J., van Dokkum, P. G., Feb. 2015. The KMOS3D Survey:
Design, First Results, and the Evolution of Galaxy Kinematics
from 0.7 ≤z ≤2.7. ApJ 799, 209.
Wizinowich, P. L., Chin, J., Johansson, E., Kellner, S., Lafon, R.,
Le Mignant, D., Neyman, C., Stomski, P., Summers, D., Sumner,
R., van Dam, M., Jun. 2006. Adaptive optics developments at
Keck Observatory. In: Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series. Vol. 6272 of Proc. SPIE . p.
627209.
Woo, J.-H., Cho, H., Husemann, B., Komossa, S., Park, D., Bennert,
V. N., Jan. 2014. A sub-kpc-scale binary active galactic nucleus
with double narrow-line regions. MNRAS 437, 32–37.
Wright, E. L., Dec. 2006. A Cosmology Calculator for the World
Wide Web. PASP 118, 1711–1715.
Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K., Ressler, M. E.,
Cutri, R. M., Jarrett, T., Kirkpatrick, J. D., Padgett, D., McMil-
lan, R. S., Skrutskie, M., Stanford, S. A., Cohen, M., Walker,
R. G., Mather, J. C., Leisawitz, D., Gautier, III, T. N., McLean,
I., Benford, D., Lonsdale, C. J., Blain, A., Mendez, B., Irace,
W. R., Duval, V., Liu, F., Royer, D., Heinrichsen, I., Howard,
J., Shannon, M., Kendall, M., Walsh, A. L., Larsen, M., Cardon,
J. G., Schick, S., Schwalm, M., Abid, M., Fabinsky, B., Naes, L.,
Tsai, C.-W., Dec. 2010. The Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer
(WISE): Mission Description and Initial On-orbit Performance.
AJ 140, 1868–1881.
Wright, S. C., McHardy, I. M., Abraham, R. G., Apr 1998. Host
galaxies of the optically violently variable quasars PKS 0736+017,
OJ 287 and LB 2136. MNRAS 295 (4), 799–812.
Wrobel, J. M., Laor, A., Jul. 2009. Discovery of Radio Emission
from the Quasar SDSS J1536+0441, a Candidate Binary Black
Hole System. Astrophysical Journal Letters 699, L22–L25.
Wrobel, J. M., Walker, R. C., Fu, H., Sep. 2014. Evidence from the
Very Long Baseline Array that J1502SE/SW are Double Hotspots,
not a Supermassive Binary Black Hole. Astrophysical Journal Let-
ters 792, L8.
Wylezalek, D., Zakamska, N. L., Greene, J. E., Riﬀel, R. A., Drory,
N., Andrews, B. H., Merloni, A., Thomas, D., Feb. 2018. SDSS-IV
MaNGA: identiﬁcation of active galactic nuclei in optical integral
ﬁeld unit surveys. MNRAS 474, 1499–1514.
Xu, D., Komossa, S., Nov. 2009. Narrow Double-Peaked Emission
Lines of SDSS J131642.90+175332.5:
Signature of a Single or
a Binary AGN in a Merger, Jet-Cloud Interaction, or Unusual
Narrow-Line Region Geometry. ApJ 705, L20–L24.
Yamada, S., Ueda, Y., Oda, S., Tanimoto, A., Imanishi, M.,
Terashima, Y., Ricci, C., May 2018. Broadband X-Ray Spectral
Analysis of the Double-nucleus Luminous Infrared Galaxy Mrk
463. ApJ 858, 106.
Yang, C., Ge, J., Lu, Y., Dec 2019. Investigating the co-evolution of
massive black holes in dual active galactic nuclei and their host
galaxies via galaxy merger simulations. Science China Physics,
Mechanics, and Astronomy 62 (12), 129511.
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, Jr., J. E., Anderson, S. F.,
Annis, J., Bahcall, N. A., Bakken, J. A., Barkhouser, R., Bastian,
S., Berman, E., Boroski, W. N., Bracker, S., Briegel, C., Briggs,
J. W., Brinkmann, J., Brunner, R., Burles, S., Carey, L., Carr,
M. A., Castander, F. J., Chen, B., Colestock, P. L., Connolly,
A. J., Crocker, J. H., Csabai, I., Czarapata, P. C., Davis, J. E.,
Doi, M., Dombeck, T., Eisenstein, D., Ellman, N., Elms, B. R.,
Evans, M. L., Fan, X., Federwitz, G. R., Fiscelli, L., Friedman,
S., Frieman, J. A., Fukugita, M., Gillespie, B., Gunn, J. E., Gur-
bani, V. K., de Haas, E., Haldeman, M., Harris, F. H., Hayes,
J., Heckman, T. M., Hennessy, G. S., Hindsley, R. B., Holm, S.,
Holmgren, D. J., Huang, C.-h., Hull, C., Husby, D., Ichikawa, S.-
68
I., Ichikawa, T., Ivezić, Ž., Kent, S., Kim, R. S. J., Kinney, E.,
Klaene, M., Kleinman, A. N., Kleinman, S., Knapp, G. R., Ko-
rienek, J., Kron, R. G., Kunszt, P. Z., Lamb, D. Q., Lee, B., Leger,
R. F., Limmongkol, S., Lindenmeyer, C., Long, D. C., Loomis, C.,
Loveday, J., Lucinio, R., Lupton, R. H., MacKinnon, B., Mannery,
E. J., Mantsch, P. M., Margon, B., McGehee, P., McKay, T. A.,
Meiksin, A., Merelli, A., Monet, D. G., Munn, J. A., Narayanan,
V. K., Nash, T., Neilsen, E., Neswold, R., Newberg, H. J., Nichol,
R. C., Nicinski, T., Nonino, M., Okada, N., Okamura, S., Ostriker,
J. P., Owen, R., Pauls, A. G., Peoples, J., Peterson, R. L., Petrav-
ick, D., Pier, J. R., Pope, A., Pordes, R., Prosapio, A., Rechen-
macher, R., Quinn, T. R., Richards, G. T., Richmond, M. W.,
Rivetta, C. H., Rockosi, C. M., Ruthmansdorfer, K., Sandford,
D., Schlegel, D. J., Schneider, D. P., Sekiguchi, M., Sergey, G.,
Shimasaku, K., Siegmund, W. A., Smee, S., Smith, J. A., Sned-
den, S., Stone, R., Stoughton, C., Strauss, M. A., Stubbs, C.,
SubbaRao, M., Szalay, A. S., Szapudi, I., Szokoly, G. P., Thakar,
A. R., Tremonti, C., Tucker, D. L., Uomoto, A., Vanden Berk, D.,
Vogeley, M. S., Waddell, P., Wang, S.-i., Watanabe, M., Wein-
berg, D. H., Yanny, B., Yasuda, N., SDSS Collaboration, Sep.
2000. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey: Technical Summary. AJ 120,
1579–1587.
Younger, J. D., Hopkins, P. F., Cox, T. J., Hernquist, L., Oct.
2008. The Self-Regulated Growth of Supermassive Black Holes.
ApJ 686, 815–828.
Yu, Q., Apr. 2002. Evolution of massive binary black holes. MNRAS
331, 935–958.
Yu, Q., Lu, Y., Kauﬀmann, G., Dec. 2005. Evolution of Accretion
Disks around Massive Black Holes: Constraints from the Demog-
raphy of Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJ 634, 901–909.
Yuan, W., Komossa, S., Zhang, C., Feng, H., Ling, Z. X., Zhao,
D. H., Zhang, S. N., Osborne, J. P., O’Brien, P., Willingale, R.,
Lapington, J., Feb 2016. Detecting tidal disruption events of mas-
sive black holes in normal galaxies with the Einstein Probe. In:
Meiron, Y., Li, S., Liu, F. K., Spurzem, R. (Eds.), Star Clusters
and Black Holes in Galaxies across Cosmic Time. Vol. 312 of IAU
Symposium. pp. 68–70.
Zabludoﬀ, A. I., Zaritsky, D., Lin, H., Tucker, D., Hashimoto, Y.,
Shectman, S. A., Oemler, A., Kirshner, R. P., Jul 1996. The En-
vironment of “E+A” Galaxies. ApJ 466, 104.
Zheng, Z.-Y., Butler, N. R., Shen, Y., Jiang, L., Wang, J.-X., Chen,
X., Cuadra, J., Aug 2016. SDSS J0159+0105:
A Radio-Quiet
Quasar with a Centi-Parsec Supermassive Black Hole Binary Can-
didate. ApJ 827 (1), 56.
69
