 
A New Approach for Improvement Security against 
DoS Attacks in Vehicular Ad-hoc Network 
 
 
Reza Fotohi 
Young Researchers and Elite Club 
Germi Branch, Islamic Azad 
University 
Germi, Iran 
Fotohi.Reza@Gmail.com 
Yaser Ebazadeh 
Department Of Computer 
Engineering 
Germi Branch, Islamic Azad 
University 
Germi, Iran 
Mohammad Seyyar Geshlag 
Department Of Computer 
Engineering 
Shabestar Branch, Islamic Azad 
University 
Shabestar, Iran 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANET) are a 
proper subset of mobile wireless networks, where nodes are 
revulsive, the vehicles are armed with special electronic devices 
on the motherboard OBU (On Board Unit) which enables them 
to trasmit and receive messages from other vehicles in the 
VANET. Furthermore the communication between the vehicles, 
the VANET interface is donated by the contact points with road 
infrastructure. VANET is a subgroup of MANETs. Unlike the 
MANETs nodes, VANET nodes are moving very fast. Impound a 
permanent route for the dissemination of emergency messages 
and alerts from a danger zone is a very challenging task. 
Therefore, routing plays a significant duty in VANETs. 
decreasing network overhead, avoiding network congestion, 
increasing traffic congestion and packet delivery ratio are the 
most important issues associated with routing in VANETs. In 
addition, VANET network is subject to various security attacks. 
In base VANET systems, an algorithm is used to dicover attacks 
at the time of confirmation in which overhead delay occurs. This 
paper proposes (P-Secure) approach which is used for the 
detection of DoS attacks before the confirmation time. This 
reduces the overhead delays for processing and increasing the 
security in VANETs. Simulation results show that the P-Secure 
approach, is more efficient than OBUmodelVaNET approach in 
terms of PDR, e2e_delay, throughput and drop packet rate. 
Keywords—component; VANET, P-Secure Protocol, DoS 
Attack, detection, OBUmodelVaNET, security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
     VANETs is particular, MANETs by which where vehicles 
and fixed location at the roadside can keep in touch speak with 
each. It can self-structure, spread comfortably and cost low 
with open structures. VANET can pleasure an increasingly 
significant role in multiple regions: when an event an episode 
occurs, it sends the procedure message speed to other cars 
besides the procedure regions that actually help to prevent 
crashes again; cars catch vehicle velocity, density status of 
several roads, and they can they are able to take actions ahead 
of time which facilitates traffic congestion; also, cars can surf 
the internet via the fixed stations at the roadside. As a result of 
more and more apps, VANET has turned into an into the focus 
of research institutes and scientists worldwide [1-5]. Each year 
there are more and more traffic jams on the roads. This is large 
due to every year there are more and more cars on the streets so 
that in 2013 there will be1410 a million vehicle in the world. It 
is feasible to find conditions where communications between 
cars can help to prevent accidents.  In this approach, cars can 
help with these questions every week. This can prevent great 
wastes of time, money and of oil reserves, in addition, 
governments spend lots of money and destroy the landscape 
when creating more roads because existing roads do not 
support the generated traffic. The resultant, a restructuring of 
traffic can prevent some of the aforementioned dilemmas. 
There are many points to consider in any wireless networks in 
overall. The Figure following gives an illustration of VANETs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. An example of VANETs senario. 
In VANET's safety is a significant issue that needs to be taken 
into account when any wireless network is designed. VANETs 
have weaknesses to various kinds of DoS attacks [6], 
Blackhole, gray hole and wormhole portion of the region of the 
safety problems existent in this kind of networks. Nevertheless, 
an another approach is presented in this paper. The main 
purpose of this work is to define a proposed approach, a 
scalable free system for VANETs where users can cooperate 
via their mobile technology and obtain updated information of 
interest about the traffic and attacks area in order to choose the 
 
best-refreshed path to their goals. in this paper, we proposed P- 
Secure approach detection algorithm is that attacks, for 
detecting DOS attacks used to commit time. This decreases the 
overhead for processing and securing the VANET is delayed. 
This approach has better special depending criteria removal 
rate, throughput, PDR and latency to develop e2e_delay, 
Therefore, this work proposes a self-managed VANET without 
any infrastructure, which will serve as an introduction to a 
more complex VANET, all this with better levels of security.  
In this paper, we implement the proposed P- Secure approach 
as the solution in NS-2 simulator to test its performance it. In 
the second section of paper, related works are presented. 
Afterward, section 3, Dos Attack in Vehicular Ad-hoc Network 
(VANETS), section 4, The proposed method, Section 5 
Experimental Data and Analysis, Finally, in section 6 
conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Security in the network is of specific problems due to man 
lives are permanently at the condition as in traditional 
networks the major security concerns include confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability none of which involves primely with 
life security. Essential information can't be either changed nor 
deleted by a malicious node. Yet, security in the network also 
contains the ability to specify the driver responsibility while 
maintaining driver privacy. Information about the car and their 
drivers within must be swapped securely and more 
importantly, timely in that the delay of message exchange may 
cause catastrophic consequences such as the collision of 
vehicles. The spread of a general security model for the 
network is very challenging in practice. 
With its dynamic characteristics and high mobility, the usage 
of wireless technology also makes VANET vulnerable to DoS 
attacks that exploit the open and broadcast characteristics of 
wireless networks. [7] Cryptographic attacks in VANET are 
classified in the next section. Further common networks 
security problem, unique security challenges arise because of 
the unique characteristics of VANET such as high mobility, 
dynamic topology, short connection duration and frequent 
disconnections. These novel characteristics bring safety 
concerns such as trust group formation, location detection, and 
security as well as certificate management. Corresponding 
preview work will be given in following sections based on the 
characteristics of the protection issue in similar work. The 
clustering system has been well thought in wireless 
technology in recent years [8]. Nevertheless, considering the 
natures of VANETs, such as sufficient energy, high speed, the 
clustering methods proposed for conventional wireless 
networks are not proper for VANETs. Hence, the clustering 
approach for VANETs should be designed exactly. The lowest 
ID clustering algorithm [9] is one of the easiest methods to 
cluster mobile nodes for VANETs. Using this method, all of 
the nodes broadcast becomes stages in which the node IDs are 
encapsulated. Further, these nodes IDs are assigned uniquely. 
In [10], authors proposed a clustering approach using affinity 
propagation for VANETs. Affinity propagation is first 
proposed to solve data clustering problem and it is show that 
this algorithm can generate clusters more efficiently compared 
with traditional solutions. The node which has the lowest ID 
in its neighborhood is selected as the cluster head node, and 
other nodes are selected as the cluster member nodes. The 
lowest ID algorithm proposed a basic idea to cluster mobile 
nodes. First, we need to define a metric to model the property 
of wireless nodes; and then we can use the metric to group 
nodes based on some rules. The follow- ing clustering 
schemes are all based on this basic idea. The difference of 
various clustering scheme is the metrics used for modeling. 
Density Based Clustering (DBC) algorithm is proposed in 
[12]. Using DBC, connectivity level, link quality and traffic 
conditions are taken into account completely to cluster vehicle 
nodes. The mobile network is divided into the dense part and 
sparse part. A node which has links more than a predefined 
value is considered as in the dense part; otherwise, it is in the 
sparse part. During the clustering process, link quality is 
estimated to make a re-clustering decision. According to the 
experiment results, the cluster head change ratio is less than 
the lowest ID algorithm [13]. So, there are some works 
devoted to design and develop specific simulators of VANET. 
Groove Net [14] is a hybrid simulator which enables 
communication between simulated vehicles, real vehicles and 
between real and simulated vehicles, and it models inter-
vehicular communication within a real street map-based 
topology which is based TIGER map data. MOVE and 
Translated [15] can rapidly generate realistic movement model 
which can be directly used in network simulators such as NS2, 
SUMO. VG Sim [16] combines movement model of vehicles 
and network simulation and transforms vehicular moves and 
applications to events for further processing of network 
simulators. NCTUns [17][18] Different kinds of attacks have 
been analyzed in MANET and their effect on the network. 
Attack such as grayhole, where the attacker node behaves 
maliciously for the time until the packets are dropped and then 
switch to their normal behavior [19]. MANET's routing 
protocols are also being exploited by the attackers in the form 
of flooding attack, which is done by the attacker either by 
using RREQ2 or data flooding [20]. Design and presentation 
of different security obstacles and attacks in mobile ad hoc 
networks as well as finding appropriate solutions to them is a 
challenging research area for researchers. Black hole attack is 
one of the famous related attacks. In [11], the idea of affinity 
propagation is used to cluster vehicle nodes in a distributed 
manner. The vehicle nodes exchange messages with their 
neighbor nodes to transmit availability and responsibility and 
make the decision based on the availability and responsibility 
values for constructing clusters. The simulation results 
demonstrate that the performance of the clustering scheme 
using affinity propagation is better than MOBIC in terms of 
stability. 
 
III. 
DOS ATTACK IN VEHICULAR AD-HOC NETWORKS  
In 
a 
VANETs, usually 
the 
attacker 
attacks 
the 
communication medium to cause the channel jam or to create 
count obstacles for the nodes from approachability the 
network. The essential purpose is to forbid the authentic nodes 
from approachability the network services and from using the 
 
network sources. The attack would result in failure of the nodes 
and VANET sources. Finally, the VANETs are no longer 
available to legitimate nodes. In VANETs, DoS should’nt be 
permissible to happen, where seamless life critical information 
must reach its intended destination securely and timely. In 
short, there are 3 routes the attackers could get DoS attacks, 
scilicet communication channel, network overloading, and 
dropping the packets  [8]. In calculating, a DoS attack is an 
attempt to make a system or VANET source unavailable to its 
intended users, like to temporarily cut off or suspend tasks of a 
host connected to the network. A DDoS is where the attack 
source is more than one, often hundreds of, unique IP. It is 
similar to a set of people crowding the entry door and not 
letting legitimate parties enter into the store, disrupting 
ordinary tasks. sinful perpetrators of DoS attacks mostly target 
services hosted on high-profile web servers such as banks, 
credit card payment gateways; but motives of revenge, 
blackmail or activism can be behind other attacks. in Dos 
Attackers diffuse false information to affect the behavior of 
other drivers In Figure 2 is shown an example of DOS attacks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. An example of the problems in the Dos attacks  in VANET 
In Figure 2, A2 sends a false message with traffic info, and 
V changes its route and frees the road, in conclusion, Attackers 
tracks vehicles to obtain those drivers’ private information ,and 
routing disrupts DOS efforts of to influence the sentences are 
as follows: 
A. 
Types of outbursts network include TCP, UDP, and ICMP that 
disrupt legitimate traffic site 
B. 
Trying to disconnect the machine and thus not being able to use 
their service 
C. Trying to prevent a particular individual from accessing a service. 
D. Trying to sabotage the service to a specific system or person 
E. 
Trying to disrupt the hair routing network 
 
IV. 
THE PROPOSED METHOD (DETAILS) 
The essential aim of the VANETs is to supply security and 
welfare for the travelers. To achieve this object, a specific 
electronic device is embedded in any vehicle that makes it 
possible to establish communication between the passengers. 
Such a network must be implemented without client-server 
network limits of communication structures. Each vehicle 
armed with a VANET machinery is a node in a mobile 
wireless network and is able to receive and send others’ 
messages via the wireless network. Traffic alerts, road signs 
and traffic observation for a moment that can be transmitted 
through such a network, provide the necessary tools to make 
decisions about the best path for the driver. In this paper we 
proposed a approach in a vehicle network improves road 
safety, transport efficiency, but also reduces the impact of 
transport on the environment; all three of these applications 
are not perfectly perpendicular to each other. For example, 
reducing the number of accidents, in turn, can reduce the 
traffic congestion and this can lead to a reduction of the 
environmental impact. 
 
A. The proposed approach 
    At first, we must have a system model to express, the 
proposed method based on which we know the position of the 
vehicles and roadside equipment as well as antennas etc. We 
introduce our proposed method with the name P -Secure 
Protocol that has been named as P-SP in the Figure. 
B. The proposed system model  
Figure (3) indicates a road that has radio transmissions and 
vehicles that have onboard radio. RSRU (roadside radio unit) 
decides to depend on its transmission range and set up in the 
area where the vehicles can form a network. In fact, we 
consider it as a threshold. The vehicles can send messages to 
RSRU through the proposed P-Secure Protocol mechanism. In 
this way, detection of the exact position of the vehicle that has 
sent the message is conducted. After discovering the situation, 
the vehicle’s data are saved in some RSRU. Any vehicle with 
OBU and anti-tampering sensors is (Tamper PROOF). These 
devices have the responsibility of storing the accurate 
information about the vehicle like speed, location and more. 
The position of the vehicles is obtained through the frequency 
and speed of vehicles and the use of OBU. Vehicles can use the 
P-Secure Protocol mechanism to request from RSRU. In fact, 
RSRU conducts the approval of vehicles and maintains the 
database. Location, time, and etc. along with the data package 
are provided to RSRU. Traffic devices use the requests using 
another database and provide the service responses only to the 
radio transmitter which has been approved, therefore causes the 
reduction of DOS attacks which could be created due to 
Flooding. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. The proposed system model (RSRU range of vehicles and a process 
in which the request is sent) 
 
C. The phase 1 of the P-Secure approach 
Proposed P-Secure, discovers the vehicle location and 
information packets that the vehicles have sent and if the 
packet was not related to the attack, the vehicle is not detected. 
To conduct the algorithm, it is required to consider a number of 
variables: 
 
Definition 1: We consider a maximum packet capacity and 
display it with M where we consider the value 20 for our work. 
Definition 2: p parameter is the number of packets sent to 
RSRU per second. 
Definition 3: α is the coefficient which is determined by the 
characteristics of the road. 
Definition 4: V_m is the maximum speed of the vehicle. 
Definition 5: V is the speed of the vehicle. 
In addition to the maximum speed, a minimum speed is also 
required that it demonstrated by low. To obtain the number of 
packets that are sent by the RSRU vehicles per second (P) the 
Equation (1) is used: 
 
𝑃 =  α ∗|𝑉−𝑣𝑚
2
| 
(1) 
Since the number of packets and the maximum speed is higher 
than the nod speed, the position of the vehicle is changing 
rapidly. We consider this as an attack and if the speed is too 
low, the vehicle's position will not change much and we 
consider this as an attack. For the attack detection algorithm, 
we act as the following steps: 
1. First we get the required information from the vehicles 
2. We set the threshold for RSRU 
3. The confirmation requests are sent to RSRUs by the vehicles. 
4. A time stamp is expressed for each device. 
5. If (the time stamp of the transmitter – time stamp of the receiver) 
is greater than the threshold value, the packet is discarded, 
otherwise the package is acceptable. 
6. Have the value of M equal to 20 and find the p value for all 
packets less than or equal to 20. 
7. If the p value is greater than or equal to 20 and the v value is 
greater than or equal to the maximum speed (v_m), the packet is 
then discarded and the packet is detected as an attack. 
8. The next mode of attack is that: if the p-value is less than or equal 
to 20 and the v value is less than or equal to the minimum speed 
(low), then the packet is discarded and the packet is detected as 
an attack. 
 
D. 
phase 2 of the P-Secure approach 
In phase 2 of the P-Secure approach, we detected attacks 
the packet capacity and/or their speed has been more or less 
than the minimum whereas the probability of DOS attack also 
exists in the delivery of any vehicle. To detect these attacks, we 
improve the proposed algorithm and add the following steps to 
it: 
TABLE I.  
REQUAREED PARAMETERS 
 
1. The confirmed vehicles are buffered at previous stages in the 
RSRU 
2. Any vehicle wishing to enter the VANET network must submit its 
application RSRU 
3. RSRU updates its’ counter for that vehicle. 
4. Allocating time slot to the devices is approved by RSRU 
5. RSRU counts the number of steps of the vehicles; if the number of 
steps is equal to the number of counting times, the counter then 
updates the vehicle’s next step and declares the vehicle as valid.  
6. The new requests are assessed. 
7. If the vehicle has a new request in the same time slot and/or the 
request number of this vehicle is more than the other vehicles, it 
is identified as malicious. 
8. Indicates the number of the damaging vehicle as the malicious. 
 
 
The number of packets per second
 
p
 
The maximum capacity packet
 
M
 
Coefficient
 
α
 
Maximum speed
 
𝑣𝑚 
Speed
 
V
 
Minimum speed
 
low
 
Communication between 
vehicles 
 
Vehicle and the roadside  
Equipment 
 
 
The roadside 
communications 
equipment
 
Start 
Receiving the traffic data 
Setting the threshold value for the PSRUs 
Sending the approval request by the vehicles 
Detecting malicious vehicles using the p-secure control algorithm 
Allocating time slots to all vehicles approved by the RSRU after 
the confirmation 
RSRU checks the number of the steps for determining the 
validity of the request and updates the counter 
RSRU checks the new request sent by the car. 
If the device has a request at the same time slot or has a higher 
number of requests than other vehicles, it is identified as 
malicious. 
End 
P-Secure 
approach 
discovers 
DoS 
attack 
before 
the 
confirmation stage. Location, time stamp, speed and etc. of the 
vehicle are considered to find out whether it is within the radar 
range or not. The proposed algorithm is also used in detecting 
the false alerts. If the count of packets and the MAX speed are 
above the node’s speed, it is considered as an attack on the 
position of the vehicle is changing quickly. Likely, if speed is 
too low, the vehicle's position will not change much and this is 
also considered as an attack. After completing the process of 
valid vehicles, they are stored in the RSRU database. The 
phase 2 of the approach is to confirm the new request that 
wants to join the network. This algorithm compares the 
previous valid database with new requests and reduces false 
requests through allowing valid nodes. The proposed P -Secure 
Protocol algorithm reduces attacks by limiting the counter and 
also not allowing the fake vehicles by the attackers. The 
flowchart of the proposed method is fully displayed in Figure 
(4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Flowchart of the P-Secure approach 
 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULT AND ANALYSIS 
This part contains evaluation of P-Secure approach 
compared with OBU model VANET approach. With the help 
of the NS-2 we were able to prove, ns is simulator project, start 
1989 as a different of real. We run two senario, one P-Secure 
approach, and OBUmodelVaNET approach, we have repeated 
the experiments by changing the several times. To, 200, 400, 
800, 1000, and 1200. The simulation parameter are shown in 
table 2 the parametess used to implementation the performance 
are given follows. 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Simulator 
NS2.34 
Area 
1000m X1000m 
Density 
150-20 
Transmission Range 
250m 
Antenna 
Omni Antenna 
Simulation duration 
200,400,600,800,1000,1200 
 MAC Layer 
802_11 
 Traffic Type 
CBR (UDP) 
 Buffer Size 
150 Packet 
 Node placement 
Random 
Simulation methods 
OBUmodelVaNET AND 
P-Secure approach 
 
As we saw in the previous section, DOS attack causes 
weakness in making the network unsecure and weakening the 
ordinary approach of the network, in this article we deal with 
providing a solution for security improvement in car networks 
against denial-of-service attacks which improves the standard 
end-to-end delay, packet delivery ratio, the number of drop 
packets and throughput. 
 
A. PDR 
PDR is define as shown in 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (2). 
𝑃𝐷𝑅 = 
Number of sent Packets
Number of received Packets ∗100 
(2) 
 
Where PDR is the package delivery rate, SendPacketNo is the 
number of sent packages, and RecievePacketNo denotes the 
number of received packages. 
B. Packet Drop Rate 
It is the measure of the number packets dropped due to 
malicious node (DoS attack). Thus, we can define 𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜 as 
shown in 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (3). 
𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝 = Send Packet − Received Packet
Send Packet
 
(3) 
 
C. End to End Delay 
End-to-end delay refers to the time taken for a packet to be 
transmitted Around the Network from source to destination.  
 
D. Throughput 
 
Throughput is the number of data packets transmited from 
source node to destination node [21]. Thus, we can define 
𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜 as shown in 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (4). 
 
𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜 = 𝑅𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑡
𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 
(4) 
Where Thro variable is the throughput, requests is the 
number of requests that are accomplished by the system, and 
time shows the total time of system observation. 
 
Fig. 5. E2E_delay vs time 
 
Fig. 6. End-to-end delay vs density 
Fig (5) and (6), shows e2e_delay against the time and 
dencity. P-Secure approach is significantly lower compared to 
OBUmodelVaNET aproach. The reason is that using the 
proposed algorithms in the P-Secure approach, the suspicious 
nodes are not allowed to be sent and the attack was also 
diagnosed quickly and the security messages are delivered with 
a very little delay to the vehicles that are at risk. 
 
Fig. 7. PDR vs  time 
Fig. 8. Packet Delivery Ratio vs density 
Fig (7) and (8), shows PDR against the time and dencity. From 
following graph, we can say that value of PDR is decreasing 
for OBUmodelVaNET under attack. When we vary pause time 
from 200 to 1000 as well PDR values for proposed approach is 
high. Thus, we can say that PDR of proposed method is 
improved than OBUmodelVaNET under attack which 
degraded due to DoS attack. 
 
Fig. 9. Dropped Packet Rate vs  time 
 
 
Fig. 10. Dropped Packet Ratio vs density 
 
Fig (9) and (10), shows drop ratio against the time and dencity. 
It shows that, between the pause times 200 to 1000, the 
OBUmodelVaNET under attack had a high packet drop, while 
the packet drops of proposed approach in these times, has 
decreased. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11. Throughput  vs time  
Fig. 12. Throughput vs density 
Fig (11) and (12), shows throughput against the time and 
dencity. So we can claim that the P-Secure approach has better 
performance in the field of throughput rather than 
OBUmodelVaNET approach in MANET. This is due to the 
proposed mechanism that shown in fig 4. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
VANETs are a kind of wireless networks which have been 
created to communication between the adjacent vehicles as 
well as adjacent vehicles with constant equipment which are 
usually roadside equipment. One of the main concerns in 
Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) is the attacks and 
influence to the system and of course having safety from the 
key concerns for many road users. In this paper, we introduce 
the (P-SECURE PROTOCOL) attack detection algorithm that 
is applied for detecting DOS attacks before the confirmation 
time. In the proposed RSRU method depending on its 
transmission range and using the proposed algorithm decides 
on what is the secure message, and sets the area where the 
vehicles can form a network. Traffic devices use the requests 
using another database and provide the service responses only 
to the radio transmitters which are approved therefore lead to 
the reduction in DOS attacks. The P-Secure approach leads to 
the reduction in processing delays and improving safety in 
VANET. To demonstrate the performance of P-Secure 
approach using the NS-2 simulator, the proposed system is 
compared to OBUmodelVaNET approach. The simulation 
results shows that P-Secure approach outperform than 
OBUmodelVaNET approach in terms of e2e_delay, PDR, 
packet drop rate and throughput. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Al-Sultan, Saif, et al. "A comprehensive survey on vehicular Ad Hoc 
network." Journal of network and computer applications 37 (2014): 380-
392. 
[2] Huo Meimei, Zheng Zengwei, Zhou Xiaowei, “Research overview of 
simulation of vehicular ad hoc networks,” Application Research of 
Computers, 2013, Vol.27, No.5, pp.1614-1620. 
[3] Jani P. 2002.Security within Ad-Hoc Networks, Seminar on Network 
Security Position Paper,pp:16-17  
[4] Jose Maria de Fuentes, Ana Isabel Gonzalez-Tablas, Arturo Ribagorda, 
"Overview of security issues in Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks", Handbook 
of Research on Mobility and Computing 2010. 
[5] Deng  H, Li W.2002. Routing security in wireless ad hoc networks. 
Communications Magazine, IEEE,pp: 70-75. 
[6] Sumra, I.A.; Hasbullah, H.; Manan, J.A., "VANET security research and 
development ecosystem," National Postgraduate Conference (NPC), 
2011, 
vol., 
no., 
pp.1,4, 
1920 
Sept. 
2011. 
doi: 
10.1109/NatPC.2011.6136344 
URL: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?&arnumber=6136344[3] 
Jing Zhao, Guohong Gao, “VADD: Vehicle-Assisted Data Delivery in 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, 2008, Vol.57, No.3, pp.1910-1922. 
[7]  J. Yu and P. Chong. A survey of clustering schemes for mobile ad hoc 
networks. Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, 7(1):32–48, May 
2005. 
[8] M. Gerla and J. Tzu-Chieh Tsai. Multicluster, mobile, multimedia radio 
network. Wireless Networks, 1:255–265, 1995. 10.1007/BF01200845. 
[9] C. Shea, B. Hassanabadi, and S. Valaee. Mobility-based clustering in 
VANETs using affinity propagation. In Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 2009. GLOBECOM 2009. IEEE, pages 1–6, December 
2009. 
 
[10] C. Shea, B. Hassanabadi, and S. Valaee. Mobility-based clustering in 
VANETs using affinity propagation. In Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 2009. GLOBECOM 2009. IEEE, pages 1–6, December 
2009. 
[11] S. Kuklinski and G. Wolny. Density based clustering algorithm for 
vanets. In Testbeds and Research Infrastructures for the Development of 
Networks Communities and Workshops, 2009. TridentCom 2009. 5th 
International Conference on, pages 1–6, April 2009. 
[12] M. Gerla and J. Tzu-Chieh Tsai. Multicluster, mobile, multimedia radio 
network. Wireless Networks, 1:255–265, 1995. 10.1007/BF01200845. 
[13] R. Mangharam, D. S. Weller, R. Rajkumar, “GrooveNet: A Hybrid 
Simulator for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Networks,” Proceedings of Second 
International 
Workshop 
Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
Communications 
(V2VCOM) Invited Paper. San Jose, USA. July 2006. 
[14] R. Mangharam, D. S. Weller, D. D. Stancil, R. Rajkumar, J.S. Parikh. 
“Groovesim: A Topography-Accurate Simulator for Geographic 
Routing in Vehicular Networks. Proceedings of Second ACM 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Vehicular 
Ad 
Hoc 
Networks 
(Mobicom/VANET 2005) Cologne, Germany. September 2005. 
[15] Karnad I F K, Mo Zhihai, Lan Kun-chan, “Rapid generation of realistic 
mobility 
models 
for 
VANET,” 
Proceedings 
of 
Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference, 2007,pp.2506-2511. 
[16] TraNSlite. http://trans.epfl.ch, 2009. 
[17] Lu Bojin, Khorashadib, Du Haininf et al. “VGSim: an integrated 
networking and microscopic vehicular mobility simulation platform,” 
Communications Magazine, 2009, Vol.47,No.5, pp.134-141. 
[18] Wang S Y, Chou C L, “NCTUns 5.0 network simulator for advanced 
wireless vehicular network researches,” Proceedings of the 10th 
International Conference on Mobile Data Management System, Services 
and Middleware, 2009, pp.375-376.[5] S.Marti, T.J.Giuli, K.Lai, 
M.Baker, “Mitigating Routing Misbehavior in Mobile Ad-Hoc 
Networks”. 
[19] Khabbazian, M., Mercier, H., & Bhargava, V. K. (2009). Severity 
analysis and countermeasure for the wormhole attack in wireless ad hoc 
networks. Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, 8(2), 736-
745. 
[20] M.T.Refaei, V.Srivastava, L.Dasilva, M.Eltoweissy, “A Reputation-
Based Mechanism for Isolating Selfish nodes in Ad-Hoc Networks,” 
Second Annual International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Systems, Networking and Services, pp.3-11, July, 2005 
[21] Shahram Behzad, Reza Fotohi, Shahram Jamali,"Improvement over the 
OLSR Routing Protocol in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks by Eliminating the 
Unnecessary Loops", IJITCS, vol.5, no.6, pp.16-22, 2013. DOI: 
10.5815/ijitcs.2013.06.03 
 
